# CHAPTER 2 The critically ill patient

- Pages: 28-39
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:28 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
9
General
Key features of the critically ill patient are severe respiratory, cardiovascular or neurological derangement, often
in combination, reflected in abnormal physiological observations (Table 2.1 and Charts 1–3). Principles of management are summarised in Box 2.1 and Figure 2.1.
Priorities
Make a rapid but systematic assessment using the Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure (ABCDE)
approach.
While doing this, collect information about the patient, the current problem, the context and co-morbidities.
Attach monitoring (electrocardiogram (ECG) and oxygen saturation) and secure venous access.
Airway and breathing
Ensure the airway is clear. If the patient is unconscious, remove dentures if loose, conduct airway opening
manoeuvres, airway suction under direct vision and consider the use of airway adjuncts. See Chapter 105 for
detailed advice on airway management.
If there is a reduced conscious level, significant respiratory compromise or a respiratory rate less than 8/min
then endotracheal intubation should be considered. Before this is done, ventilate the patient using a bag-mask
system or a supraglottic airway device with 100% oxygen.
What is the respiratory rate? Rates <8 or >30/min signify potential critical illness. Is there respiratory distress,
shown by dyspnoea, tachypnoea, ability to speak only in short sentences or single words, agitation and sweating? Is arterial oxygen saturation <90% despite supplemental oxygen? This indicates severe impairment of gas
exchange. See Chapter 30 for management of respiratory failure.
Circulation
Remember that a ‘normal’ blood pressure may be maintained by vasoconstriction and does not mean that
organ perfusion is adequate. Signs of low cardiac output include confusion and agitation, cold extremities,
sweating, oliguria and metabolic acidosis.
The critically ill patient
David O’Brien and Nathan Eager
CHAPTER 2

<!-- page:29 -->
10
Acute Medicine
Heart rates <40 or >130/min with life threatening features require urgent correction: see Chapter 13 for
management of arrhythmias.
If systolic BP is <90 mmHg, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) is <65 mmHg or the systolic has fallen by more
than 40 mmHg and there are signs of low cardiac output, urgent correction is needed. Look carefully at the
jugular venous pressure (JVP), which may provide an important clue to the diagnosis.
If there are no signs of pulmonary oedema, give IV fluid (500 mL crystalloid over 15 min). If hypovolaemia or
vasodilatation is likely (suspect vasodilatation if the pulses are bounding), lay the patient flat and elevate the
foot of the bed.
Table 2.1  Nine key observations in suspected critical illness.
Observation
Signs of critical illness
Action
Airway
Evidence of upper airway obstruction (Table 2.2)
See Table 2.2 and Chapter 105 for
management of the airway
Respiratory rate
Respiratory rate <8 or >30/min
Give oxygen
Connect a pulse oximeter
Check arterial oxygen saturation and blood
gases
See Chapter 30 for management of respiratory
failure
Arterial oxygen
saturation
SaO2 < 90%
Give oxygen
Check arterial blood gases (Chapter 7)
Heart rate
Heart rate <40 or >130/min with signs of
impaired organ perfusion
Give oxygen
Connect an ECG monitor and obtain IV
access
See Chapter 13 for management of cardiac
arrhythmias
Blood pressure
Systolic BP < 90 mmHg, a MAP <65 mmHg or a
drop of systolic BP by >40 mmHg with signs of
impaired organ perfusion.
Give oxygen
Connect an ECG monitor and obtain IV access
Perfusion
Signs of impaired organ perfusion: cool mottled
skin; capillary refill time >2 s; agitation/reduced
conscious level; oliguria; lactate >4
Give oxygen
Connect an ECG monitor and obtain IV access
Conscious level
Reduced conscious level (Less than ‘alert’ on an
ACVPU scale)
Stabilise airway, breathing and circulation
Consider urgent endotracheal intubation
if less than ‘responsive to voice’ on
ACVPU scale
Exclude/correct hypoglycaemia
Give naloxone if opioid poisoning is possible
See Chapter 3 for further management
of the patient with a reduced
consciousness level
Temperature
Core temperature <36 °C or >38 °C, with
hypotension, hypoxaemia, oliguria or agitation/
reduced conscious level
See Chapter 5 for further management of
sepsis
Blood glucose
Blood glucose <4 mmol/L with signs of
hypoglycaemia (sweating, abnormal behaviour,
reduced conscious level, seizures)
Give 100 mL of 20% glucose or 200 mL of
10% glucose over 15–30 min IV, or glucagon
1 mg IV/IM/SC, see Chapter 81
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale score.
ACVPU scale with approximate GCS: alert = GCS 15; confused = GCS 14; voice responsive = GCS 12; pain
responsive = GCS 8; unresponsive = GCS 3.

<!-- page:30 -->
The critically ill patient
11
Table 2.2  Assessment and stabilisation of the airway.
Signs of acute upper
airway obstruction
Causes of acute upper airway
obstruction
Action if you suspect upper
airway obstruction
Conscious
patient
Respiratory distress*
Inspiratory stridor
Suprasternal retraction
Abnormal voice
Coughing/choking
Foreign body
Anaphylaxis (Chapter 4)
Angioedema (Chapter 100)
Sit the patient up
Give high-flow oxygen
Call for urgent help from
someone trained in endotracheal
intubation and an ENT surgeon
Specific management of the cause
of obstruction, e.g. Adrenaline in
the case of anaphylaxis
Unconscious
patient
Respiratory arrest
Inspiratory stridor
Gurgling
Grunting/snoring
Above causes as well as laxity of
the tongue and soft tissues of
the oropharynx, inhalation of a
foreign body, secretions, blood
or vomitus
Head-tilt/chin-lift manoeuvre
Remove dentures if loose and
suction under direct vision
Call for urgent help from someone
trained in endotracheal intubation
See Chapter 105 for management
of the airway
Specific management of cause of
obstruction, e.g. adrenaline in the
case of anaphylaxis
* Respiratory distress is shown by dyspnoea, tachypnoea, ability to speak only in short sentences or single words,
agitation and sweating.
Chart 1  The NEWS2 scoring system.
Physiological parameter
3
2
1
Score 0
1
2
3
Respiration rate (per minute)
≤8
9–11
12–20
21–24
≥25
SpO2 Scale 1 (%)
≤91
92–93
94–95
≥96
SpO2 Scale 2 (%)
≤83
84–85
86–87
88–92 ≥93
on air
93–94 on
oxygen
95–96 on
oxygen
≥97 on
oxygen
Air or oxygen?
Oxygen
Air
Systolic blood pressure
(mmHg)
≤90
91–100
101–110
111–219
≥220
Pulse (per minute)
≤40
41–50
51–90
91–110
111–130
≥131
Consciousness
Alert
CVPU
Temperature (°C)
≤35.0
35.1–36.0
36.1–38.0
38.1–39.0
≥39.1
Source: Reproduced from RCP, 2017/Royal College of Physicians.
NEW score
Clinical risk
Response
Aggregate score 0–4
Low
Ward-based response
Red score
Score of 3 in any individual parameter
Low–medium
Urgent ward-based response*
Aggregate score 5–6
Medium
Key threshold for urgent response*
Aggregate score 7 or more
High
Urgent or emergency response†
* Response by a clinician or team with competence in the assessment and treatment of acutely ill patients and in
recognising when the escalation of care to a critical care team is appropriate.
† The response team must also include staff with critical care skills, including airway management.
Source: Reproduced from RCP, 2017/Royal College of Physicians.
Chart 2  NEWS2 thresholds and triggers.

<!-- page:31 -->
12
Acute Medicine
Chart 3  Clinical response to the NEWS2 trigger thresholds.
NEW score
Frequency of monitoring
Clinical response
0
Minimum 12 hourly
•	 Continue routine NEWS monitoring
Total 1–4
Minimum 4–6 hourly
•	 Inform registered nurse, who must assess the patient
•	 Registered nurse decides whether increased frequency of
monitoring and/or escalation of care is required
3 in single parameter
Minimum 1 hourly
•	 Registered nurse to inform medical team caring for the
patient, who will review and decide whether escalation
of care is necessary
Total 5 or more urgent
response threshold
Minimum 1 hourly
•	 Registered nurse to immediately inform the medical
team caring for the patient
•	 Registered nurse to request urgent assessment by a
clinician or team with core competencies in the care of
acutely ill patients
•	 Provide clinical care in an environment with monitoring
facilities
Total 7 or more
emergency response
threshold
Continuous monitoring of
vital signs
•	 Registered nurse to immediately inform the medical
team caring for the patient – this should be at least at
specialist registrar level
•	 Emergency assessment by a team with critical care
competencies, including practitioner(s) with advanced
airway management skills
•	 Consider transfer of care to a level 2 or 3 clinical care
facility, i.e. higher-dependency unit or ICU
•	 Clinical care in an environment with monitoring facilities
Source: Reproduced from RCP, 2017/Royal College of Physicians.
Use the Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure (ABCDE) approach to assess and treat the
patient.
Do a complete initial assessment and re-assess regularly.
Treat life-threatening problems before moving to the next part of the assessment.
Assess the effects of treatment.
Recognize when you will need extra help. Call for appropriate help early.
Use all members of the team. This enables interventions (e.g. assessment, attaching monitors and
intravenous access), to be undertaken simultaneously.
Communicate effectively – plan approach.
The aim of the initial treatment is to keep the patient alive and achieve some clinical improvement. This
will buy time for further treatment and making a diagnosis.
Remember: it can take a few minutes for treatments to work, so wait a short while before reassessing
the patient after an intervention.
Box 2.1  The critically ill patient: principles of management (Resuscitation Council [UK]).

<!-- page:32 -->
The critically ill patient
13
Neurological status (‘disability’)
What is the conscious level (assessed using the ‘ACVPU’ scale)? If the patient is unresponsive to voice then
contact someone with advanced airway skills as the patient may need urgent endotracheal intubation.
If the conscious level is reduced, you must exclude hypoglycaemia by immediate stick test. If blood glucose
is <4.0 mmol/L, give 100 mL of 20% glucose or 200 mL of 10% glucose over 15–30 min IV, or glucagon 1 mg
IV/IM/SC. Recheck blood glucose after 10 min, if still below 4.0 mmol/L, repeat the above IV glucose treatment.
In patients with malnourishment or alcohol-use disorder, there is a remote risk of precipitating Wernicke
encephalopathy by a glucose load: prevent this by giving thiamine 100 mg IV before or shortly after glucose
administration. See Chapter 46 for further management of hypoglycaemia.
If the respiratory rate is <12/min or the pupils are pinpoint, or there is another reason to suspect opioid poisoning, give naloxone. Give up to 1 dose of 400 μg IV, then 800 μg at 1-min intervals if there is no response, and then
give 2 mg for 1 dose if there is still no response. The aim is to achieve a respiratory rate of 12–16/min. Doses can
be given IM but only if the IV route is not available. Until the respiratory rate is around 15/min.
Further doses or an infusion may be needed.
If there are recurrent or prolonged major seizures, treat with buccal midazolam, IV lorazepam or rectal diazepam, see Chapter 57 for management of seizures.
Assess using ABCDE method
Key observations (Table 2.1 and
Chart 1-4)
Oxygen, ECG monitor, IV  access
Stabilize airway, (Table 2.2)
breathing and circulation
Correct hypoglycaemia
Focused history: major problems,
context and comorbidities
Systematic examination
Urgent investigation (Table 2.3)
Further management directed by
dominant clinical problem or
working diagnosis
You are likely to need
help, so don’t delay
calling for this
Suspected critical illness: severe
respiratory, cardiovascular or
neurological derangement
Figure 2.1  Approach to the patient with suspected critical illness.

<!-- page:33 -->
14
Acute Medicine
Examine the eyes and pupils, and check for neck stiffness.
Make a rapid assessment of limb tone and power: is there lateralized weakness?
Exposure (entire examination)
Check for abdominal tenderness and guarding. If the patient has severe abdominal pain or generalised abdominal tenderness, and is shocked (systolic BP <90 mmHg with cold skin), the likely diagnosis is generalised peritonitis, mesenteric infarction, severe pancreatitis or ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm; for further reading,
please see Chapter 32.
Examine the limbs, spine and perineum for evidence of ischaemia or a septic focus.
Further management
Investigation of the critically ill patient is given in Table 2.3. Further management is directed by the dominant
clinical problem or working diagnosis.
Shock
General
Shock is acute circulatory failure associated with inadequate oxygen utilisation by the cells, resulting in organ
dysfunction and lactic acidosis (>2 mmol/L).
•	 Compensatory mechanisms may initially maintain the blood pressure, but hypotension is usually present and
is defined by:
•	 Systolic blood pressure (SBP) <90 mmHg or mean arterial pressure (MAP) <65 mmHg or
•	 Fall in systolic BP >40 mmHg
•	 Causes of shock are given in Table 2.4. Up to one-third of patients admitted to ICU have shock predominantly caused by sepsis. Clinical signs that may indictae the underlying cuase are shown in Table 2.5.
Table 2.3  Investigation of the critically ill patient.
Immediate
Arterial blood gases, pH and lactate
ECG
Blood glucose
Plasma sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Full blood count
Urgent
Chest X-ray
Echocardiography if hypotension/shock
Cranial CT if reduced conscious level or focal neurological signs
Coagulation screen if low platelet count, suspected coagulation disorder, jaundice or purpura
Biochemical profile
Amylase if abdominal pain or tenderness
C-reactive protein
Blood culture if suspected sepsis
Urine stick test
Toxicology screen (serum 10 mL and urine 50 mL) if suspected poisoning

<!-- page:34 -->
The critically ill patient
15
•	 Monitor vital signs in patients at risk (e.g. acute coronary syndrome and pneumonia) to detect the first signs
of developing shock and take prompt action to reverse this.
•	 Consider early echocardiography in unexplained shock or shock that is suspected to be a result of a cardiogenic origin. Table 2.6 gives a summary of these indications.
Priorities
Initial management is summarised in Figure 2.2.
1	 If hypovolaemia or vasodilatation is likely, lay the patient flat and elevate the foot of the bed.
2	 Give oxygen. Place an IV cannula. Attach an ECG monitor. Check oxygen saturation. Make a rapid clinical
assessment (Figure 2.1). Look carefully at the JVP, and assess skin temperature and perfusion. Investigations
needed urgently are given in Table 2.3.
Table 2.5  Clinical signs pointing to the cause of hypotension.
Cause of hypotension
Pulse volume
Skin temperature
Jugular venous pressure
Hypovolaemia
Low
Cool
Low
Cardiac obstruction or pump failure
Low
Cool
Normal or raised
Vasodilatation
Normal or increased
Warm
Low
Blood culture
Urine stick test
Table 2.4  Differential diagnosis of hypotension and shock.
Hypovolaemia
Haemorrhage
Urinary loss
Gastrointestinal fluid loss
Cutaneous loss (e.g. burns)
Third-space sequestration (e.g. acute pancreatitis)
Cardiac obstruction
Pulmonary embolism (Chapter 31)
Cardiac tamponade (Chapter 6)
Tension pneumothorax (Chapter 28)
Cardiac pump failure
Acute myocardial infarction (usually associated with pulmonary oedema, except when due to right ventricular
infarction)
Acute myocardial ischaemia (usually associated with pulmonary oedema)
Myocarditis, postpartum cardiomyopathy or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmia (especially when associated with valve disorder, e.g. severe aortic stenosis, or impaired left ventricular
function, in which case usually associated with pulmonary oedema)
Acute aortic or mitral regurgitation (due to endocarditis, aortic dissection, papillary muscle or chordal rupture) (always
associated with pulmonary oedema)
Ventricular septal rupture complicating myocardial infarction (often associated with pulmonary oedema)
Vasodilatation
Sepsis
Drugs and toxins
Anaphylaxis
Acute adrenal insufficiency (Addisonian crisis)

<!-- page:35 -->
16
Acute Medicine
Table 2.6  Indications for urgent echocardiography in the hypotensive patient.
Suspected cardiac tamponade
•	 Hypotension and breathlessness following placement of central venous cannula or pacing lead, or in a patient with
known cancer
•	 Raised jugular venous pressure
•	 Pulsus paradoxus >10 mmHg
Suspected acute major pulmonary embolism
•	 Risk factors for venous thromboembolism
•	 Raised jugular venous pressure
•	 Hypoxaemia
Hypotension with pulmonary oedema
Unexplained severe hypotension
Systolic BP <90 mmHg or mean arterial pressure (MAP)
<65 mmHg or fall in systolic BP >40 mmHg with organ
dysfunction and lactic acidosis
Assessment using ABCDE method
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Oxygen, ECG monitor, IV access
Stabilize airway and breathing
Correct major arrhythmia (Chapter 13)
If hypovolaemia or vasodilatation
likely, lay the patient ﬂat and
elevate foot of bed
Focused assessment (see text)
Consider differential diagnosis (Table 2.4)
Urgent investigation (Table 2.3)
Yes
No
Pulmonary oedema?
Urgent echocardiography
(Tables 2.6 and 2.7)
Start inotropic–vasopressor therapy
(Tables 2.8 and 2.9)
Give IV crystalloid
500 mL over 15 minutes
Reassess and repeat if no
pulmonary oedema
Review clinical features and results
Diagnosis and treatment of underlying disorder (Table 2.4)
Consider bladder catheter and invasive central venous/
arterial pressure monitoring
Figure 2.2  Management of hypotension and shock.

<!-- page:36 -->
The critically ill patient
17
Questions to ask yourself include:
•	 Is there obvious haemorrhage from the gastrointestinal tract (Chapters 38 and 39) or another site (e.g.
abdominal aortic aneurysm [Chapter 18]).
•	 Is there a major arrhythmia (Chapter 39).
•	 Is there ECG evidence of an acute coronary syndrome (ST segment elevation or depression, new left bundle branch block) (Chapter 12).
•	 Is there associated pulmonary oedema, indicating cardiogenic shock (see below).
•	 Is there fever, or other features pointing to sepsis (Chapter 5).
•	 Is pulmonary embolism possible (Chapter 31). Hypotension and hypoxaemia without pulmonary oedema
suggest pulmonary embolism or sepsis; in this setting, a raised JVP would favour pulmonary embolism
and a low JVP sepsis.
•	 Is tension pneumothorax a possibility (e.g. recent central vein cannulation) (Chapter 28).
•	 Could this be anaphylaxis (Chapter 4)? If the patient has recently been exposed to a potential allergen,
and has urticaria, erythema, angio-oedema or wheeze, treat as anaphylaxis and give adrenaline 0.5–1 mg
IM (0.5–1 mL of 1 in 1000 solution). Further management is detailed in Chapter 4.
3	 If hypotension does not respond promptly, put in a bladder catheter so that urine output can be monitored.
The urine output is a rough guide to renal blood flow and cardiac output; the target is >0.5 mL/kg/h.
If there is obvious haemorrhage
Get help from a gastroenterologist (if you are dealing with suspected upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage) or
a surgeon (see Chapters 38 and 39).
Place a second large-bore IV cannula (e.g. grey Venflon).
Activate the local Major Haemorrhage Protocol.
Rapidly transfuse crystalloid until the systolic BP is around 100 mmHg. Start transfusing blood as soon as it
is available via the major haemorrhage protocol.
Aim for a haemoglobin concentration of 80 g/L.
•	 Correct clotting abnormalities. If the prothrombin time is >1.5× control, give vitamin K 10 mg IV and 2 units
of fresh frozen plasma. If the platelet count is <50 × 1012/L, give platelet concentrate. Recheck the platelet
count if >4 units of blood have been transfused. If fibrinogen is <1.5 g/L, give cryoprecipitate.
•	 Consider tranexamic acid.
•	 Correct hypocalcaemia by maintaining ionised Ca >1.13 mmol/L.
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiogenic shock is the second most common cause of shock and accounts for nearly 20% of all cases of
shock. It has an in-hospital mortality rate approaching 60% and therefore it is important to prioritise early
recognition and treatment. Clinically, it is often characterised by hypotension in combination with pulmonary
oedema and is primarily due to left ventricular failure. The treatment for this form of shock is often more distinct from other forms of shock and therefore warrants specific attention.
Priorities
•	 Correct major arrhythmias (Chapter 13).
•	 If there is ECG evidence of ST-segment-elevation acute coronary syndrome, consider primary angioplasty if
feasible (Chapter 12).
•	 Arrange urgent echocardiography to assess right and left ventricular function and to exclude ventricular
septal rupture, pericardial tamponade and acute aortic or mitral regurgitation (Table 2.7).

<!-- page:37 -->
18
Acute Medicine
•	 Increase the inspired oxygen, aiming for an oxygen saturation of >90%/arterial PO2 > 8 kPa. If these targets
are not met despite an inspired oxygen concentration of 60%, consider the use of a continuous positive
airway pressure system (Chapter 113). Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be appropriate in some
patients: discuss this with an intensivist and cardiologist.
•	 Consider starting inotropic/vasopressor therapy (Tables 2.8 and 2.9).
•	 Diuretics are relatively ineffective in patients with cardiogenic shock, but can be used in case of fluid overload once the cardiac output has increased (as shown by improvement in the patient’s mental state and skin
perfusion): if renal function is normal, give Furosemide 40 mg IV.
Table 2.9  Inotropic/vasopressor therapy: dosages.
Drug
Dosage (μg/kg/min)
Effect
Adrenaline
0.05
Beta-1 inotropism and beta-2 vasodilatation
0.05–5
Beta-1 inotropism and alpha-1 vasoconstriction
Dobutamine
5–40
Beta-1 inotropism and beta-2 vasodilatation
Dopamine
5–10
Beta-1 inotropism
10–40
Alpha-1 vasoconstriction
Noradrenaline
0.05–5
Alpha-1 vasoconstriction and beta-1 inotropism
Milrinone
0.375–0.75
Phosphodiesterase inhibitor; inotropy and vasodilatation
Table 2.7  Echocardiographic findings in hypotension.
Cause of
hypotension
IVC
LV size
LV contraction
RV size
RV contraction
Hypovolaemia
Flat
Small
Increased
Small
Increased
Sepsis
Flat
Normal or large
Normal, reduced or
increased
Normal
or large
Normal or
reduced
LV dysfunction due to
ischaemia
Normal
or dilated
Large
Reduced regionally or
globally
Normal
Normal (unless
associated RV
infarction)
Acute major
pulmonary embolism
Dilated
Normal or small
Normal or increased
Large
Reduced
Cardiac tamponade
Dilated
Normal or small
Normal or increased
Normal
or small
Diastolic free
wall collapse
RV infarction
Dilated
Normal or large if
associated LV inferior
infarction
Normal or reduced if
associated inferior
infarction
Large
Reduced
IVC, inferior vena cava; LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular.
Table 2.8  Choice of inotropic/vasopressor therapy.
Cause of hypotension
Choice of therapy
Left ventricular failure
Dobutamine or Milrinone if systolic BP is >90 mmHg
Digoxin
Right ventricular infarction
Dobutamine if systolic BP is 80–90 mmHg
Pulmonary embolism
Noradrenaline if systolic BP is <80 mmHg
Cardiac tamponade while awaiting pericardiocentesis
Noradrenaline
Septic shock
Noradrenaline
Dobutamine should be added if cardiac output is low
Anaphylactic shock
Adrenaline

<!-- page:38 -->
The critically ill patient
19
•	 Providing the systolic BP has increased to at least 100 mmHg systolic, start a nitrate infusion, initially at low
dose (e.g. isosorbide dinitrate 2 mg/h).
•	 If the patient is not improving, consider haemodynamic monitoring using pulse contour or thermodilution
techniques to allow more accurate titration of therapy. Adjust the doses of inotrope/vasopressor +/nitrate,
aiming for normalisation of tissue perfusion parameters (serum lactate, urine output and skin perfusion).
•	 Discuss management with a cardiologist if you suspect a surgically correctable cause (e.g. papillary muscle
rupture) or if there is evidence of acute myocardial ischaemia without infarction (Chapter 12).
•	 If appropriate discuss early with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) centre as venous-to-arterial
ECMO or another form of mechanical cardiac support may be required.
Further management
The key points in the management of hypotension/shock are to:
•	 Make a diagnosis and give specific treatment (e.g. pericardiocentesis for tamponade, PCI for ACS, cardiac
surgery for ruptured papillary muscle). Seek help from an intensivist and, in the case of cardiogenic shock, a
cardiologist.
•	 Correct cardiac arrhythmias.
•	 Correct hypovolaemia while avoiding fluid overload.
•	 Correct hypoxia and biochemical abnormalities.
•	 Use inotropic/vasopressor therapy if there is refractory hypotension.
Summary
1	 Make a diagnosis and give specific treatment
•	 Consider the causes in Table 2.4.
•	 Echocardiography is indicated if the diagnosis remains unclear.
•	 Give hydrocortisone 200 mg IV if the patient has been on previous long-term steroid treatment (prednisolone >7.5 mg daily) or you suspect acute adrenal insufficiency (Chapter 47).
2	 Correct cardiac arrhythmias
•	 Ventricular tachycardia or supraventricular tachycardia with life-threatening features (shock, syncope,
myocardial ischaemia, severe heart failure) should be treated with DC cardioversion (Chapter 106).
•	 Acute atrial fibrillation: consider DC cardioversion if the ventricular rate is >140 min, after correction of
hypoxia and electrolyte disorders. Otherwise, give amiodarone IV (via a central line; 300 mg in glucose 5%
over 60 min, followed by 900 mg over 24 h). Most drugs used to control the ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation are contraindicated in hypotension. Digoxin is largely ineffective when sympathetic drive is high. If
there are life-threatening features present then treat urgently with DC cardioversion.
•	 If there is severe bradycardia (heart rate < 40 min), give atropine 0.6–1.2 mg IV, with further doses at 5-min
intervals up to a total dose of 3 mg if the heart rate remains below 60 min. If there is little response to
atropine, use an external transcutaneous pacing system or place a temporary pacing wire (Chapter 107).
3	 Correct hypovolaemia
•	 If there is obvious hypovolaemia (appropriate clinical setting; low JVP with flat neck veins), give IV fluid
(blood, colloid or crystalloid as appropriate to the cause). There is no role for a central line unless the
patient needs inotropic medication.
•	 If the evidence for hypovolaemia is less certain, but there are no clinical signs of fluid overload, give a fluid
challenge, especially if the JVP is difficult to assess.
•	 If systolic BP remains <90 mmHg or MAP <65 mmHg despite correction or exclusion of hypovolaemia,
search for and treat other causes of hypotension, of which sepsis is the most likely. In patients with acute
bleeding, relative hypotension can be accepted until the bleeding is stopped surgically. In sepsis with prior
systemic hypertension, a MAP >65 mmHg may be needed to prevent acute kidney injury.

<!-- page:39 -->
20
Acute Medicine
•	 There is no single value of LV filling pressure or CVP that should guide fluid replacement; instead, multiple
methods should be used, including dynamic measures (e.g. pulse-pressure variability on the arterial line or
the change in IVC diameter on leg raising).
•	 Even in fluid-responsive patients, titrate fluid carefully to avoid hypervolaemia.
•	 If BP remains low, inotropic–vasopressor therapy will be needed.
4	 Correct hypoxia and biochemical abnormalities
•	 Maintain PaO2 > 8 kPa (60 mmHg), arterial saturation > 90%.
•	 Severe metabolic acidosis may contribute to hypotension. It is crucial to identify the cause of metabolic
acidosis so that the correct treatment can be initiated. Causes of metabolic acidosis are given in Chapter 7.
If arterial pH is <7.1 and falling, consider giving 50 mL of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate whilst waiting for a
response to treatment of the underlying disease. Recheck arterial pH after 30 min.
5	 Use inotropic/vasopressor therapy if there is refractory hypotension
•	 If systolic BP remains <90 mmHg (MAP <65 mmHg) with signs of hypoperfusion (associated with low
central venous oxygen saturation) despite correction of hypovolaemia, start inotropic/vasopressor therapy
whilst searching for the underlying cause.
•	 Inotropes are not indicated for a low LV ejection fraction on echocardiography without signs of low cardiac output.
•	 Invasive central venous and arterial pressure monitoring is recommended.
•	 Choice of therapy and dosages are summarised in Tables 2.8 and 2.9.
•	 Discuss with a cardiologist whether intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (balloon pump) or left ventricular
assist device is indicated as a bridge to definitive treatment (e.g. surgery for a ruptured papillary muscle).
Further reading
Francis GS, Bartos JA, Adatya S. (2014) Inotropes. J Am Coll Cardiol 63, 2069–2078.
Harjola V-P, Mebazaa A, Celutkiene J. (2016) Contemporary management of acute right ventricular failure: a
statement from the Heart Failure Association and the Working Group on Pulmonary Circulation and right
ventricular function of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 18, 226–241.
Levy B, Bastien O, Bendjelid K. (2015) Experts’ recommendations for the management of adult patients with
cardiogenic shock. Ann Intensive Care 5, 17. (Open access). doi: 10.1186/s13613-015-0052-1.
Mackenzie DC, Noble VE. (2014) Assessing volume status and fluid responsiveness in the emergency
department. Clin Exp Emerg Med 1, 67–77. doi: 10.15441/ceem.14.040.
Roshdy A, Francisco N, Rendon A, et al. (2014) Critical care echo rounds: haemodynamic instability. Echo Res
Pract 1(1), D1–D8. doi: 10.1530/ERP-14-0008.
Royal College of Physicians (2017). National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2: standardising the assessment of
acute-illness severity in the NHS. Updated report of a working party. London: RCP. https://www.rcp.
ac.uk/improving-care/resources/national-early-warning-score-news-2.
Soar, J., Deakin, C. D., Nolan, J. P., Perkins, G. D., Yeung, J., Couper, K., Hall, M., Thorne, C., Price, S., Lockey,
A., Wyllie, J., & Hampshire, S. (2021). Adult advanced life support guidelines. Resuscitation Council UK.
https://www.resus.org.uk/library/2021-resuscitation-guidelines/adult-advanced-lifesupport-guidelines.
Task force of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. (2014) Consensus on circulatory shock and
hemodynamic monitoring. Intensive Care Med 40, 1795–1815. doi: 10.1007/s00134-014-3525-z.
Van Herck JL, Claeys MJ, De Paep R, et al. (2015) Management of cardiogenic shock complicating acute
myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 4, 278–297.
Weiss SL, Peters MJ, Alhazzani W, et al. (2020) Surviving sepsis campaign international guidelines for the
management of septic shock and sepsis-associated organ dysfunction in children. Intensive Care Med
46(Suppl 1), 10–67. doi: 10.1007/s00134-019-05878-6.
