# CHAPTER 5 Sepsis

- Pages: 52-61
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:52 -->
33
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
•	 Make a working diagnosis of sepsis (Box  5.1) if a patient has organ dysfunction in the context of
suspected or proven infection. Because infection may be occult consider the diagnosis whenever organ
dysfunction is unexplained.
Sepsis
Andrew McCallum
CHAPTER 5
Term
Definition
Clinical criteria
Sepsis
Life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a
dysregulated host response to infection
Suspected or proven infection with total
SOFA score ≥ 2
Septic shock
Subset of sepsis in which underlying circulatory,
cellular and metabolic abnormalities are
associated with a greater risk of mortality than
sepsis alone
Sepsis with persisting hypotension
requiring vasopressor therapy to maintain
mean arterial pressure ≥65 mmHg and
having a serum lactate level > 2 mmol/L,
despite adequate volume resuscitation
Organ
dysfunction
Organ dysfunction is identified using SOFA score.
If previous baseline organ dysfunction is not
known, for the purposes of the initial diagnosis
baseline SOFA could be assumed as 0.
Please refer to Table 5.1
qSOFA
Consists of three variables. Presence of two or more
of these abnormalities in patients with suspected
infection identifies higher risk of developing adverse
outcomes often associated with sepsis.
Systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg
Acute change in mentation (GCS ≥ 13)
Respiratory rate > 22/min
Red Flag
Sepsis
Pragmatic, operational solution to sepsis
identification on the wards. Patients with
suspected infection meeting the criteria should
be treated as a case of ‘suspected sepsis’
Suspected or proven infection with
NEWS2 score of ≥7
OR
Suspected or proven infection with
NEWS2 score of 5 or 6 AND
•	 Lactate >2 mmol/L
•	 Chemotherapy in the last 6 weeks
•	 Other organ failure evident (e.g. acute
kidney injury [AKI])
•	 Patient looks extremely unwell
•	 Patient is actively deteriorating
Definition refers to the illness concept and clinical criteria refers to the clinical variables used to identify a case of
sepsis or septic shock.
SOFA, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment.
Box 5.1  Definitions and criteria.

<!-- page:53 -->
34
Acute Medicine
• Septic shock (Box 5.1) is a subset of sepsis in which underlying circulatory, cellular and metabolic abnormalities are associated with a greater risk of mortality than sepsis alone.
• Escherichia coli and other Enterobacterales, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus), Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) and Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A Strep) are the most
common pathogens.
• A good outcome depends on prompt diagnosis, timely administration of appropriate initial antibiotic therapy,
adequate fluid resuscitation and drainage of any infected collection (source control).
Clinical assessment of the patient with suspected sepsis
Patients with suspected sepsis require prompt and focussed clinical history and examination. Consider risk
factors for sepsis:
• Exposure to pathogens
• Typically, commensal pathogens in the United Kingdom
• Consider outbreaks and recent travel
• Impaired immunity – anatomical
• Loss of epithelial barrier – wounds, ulcers, surgery, lines, perforated viscus, injecting drug use
• Loss of normal drainage – urinary/biliary obstruction, lung disease, lymphoedema
• Prosthetic material – lines, catheters, endotracheal tubes
• Impaired immunity – cellular or humoral
• Iatrogenic – chemotherapy, deliberate immunosuppression
• Chronic illness – diabetes, liver/renal failure, malignancy, malnutrition
• Haematological malignancy/marrow failure
• Splenectomy/hyposplenism
Table 5.1  Sequential (sepsis-related) organ failure assessment score.
Organ system
Variable (units)
Dysfunction
Failure
0
1
2
3
4
Respiratory
system
PaO2/FiO2 ratio (kPa)
≥53.3
<53.3
<40
<26.7 and
ventilation
<13.3 and
ventilation
Cardiovascular
system
MAP (mmHg) or
vasoactive drugs
μg/kg/min
MAP ≥70
MAP <70
Dopamine <5 or
Dobutamine
Epinephrine or
norepinephrine
≤0.1 or
dopamine
5.1–15
Epinephrine or
norepinephrine
>0.1 or
dopamine >15
Central nervous
system
Glasgow Coma Score
15
13–14
10–12
6–9
<6
Coagulation
Platelets
≥150
<150
<100
<50
<20
Renal
Creatinine (μmol/L)
OR
Urine output (mL/24 h)
<110
110–170
171–299
300–440
<500 mLs/24 h
>400
<200 mLs/h
Liver
Bilirubin μmol/L
<20
20–32
33–101
102–204
>204

<!-- page:54 -->
Sepsis
35
•	 HIV infection
•	 Congenital immunodeficiency syndromes
•	 Pre-existing organ dysfunction
•	 Heart failure, chronic lung disease, renal failure, liver failure
•	 Reduced physiological reserve increases the risk of more severe infection
•	 Extremes of age and pregnancy
•	 Risks are greater in babies and the elderly. Reflects reduced reserve and immune immaturity or
senescence
•	 Pregnancy, including the peripartum, and up to 4 weeks post birth/loss
An overview of clinical assessment is shown in Table 5.2.
•	 Prioritise observations for a NEWS2 score and measure lactate.
•	 Remember that some patients with sepsis may not develop a fever – including those at extremes of age, with
spinal cord injuries, or those on some anticancer treatments.
•	 The clinical setting may make it obvious, for example signs of pneumonia (Chapters  25) or meningitis
(Chapter 73) or recent instrumentation of the urinary or biliary tract.
•	 Check for neck stiffness, focal lung crackles or bronchial breathing, heart murmur, abdominal tenderness or
guarding, acute arthritis, cellulitis, soft tissue abscess and signs of infection at the site of IV lines.
•	 Obtain a surgical opinion if you suspect an abdominal or pelvic source of sepsis.
•	 Many patients with neutropenic sepsis (Chapter 74) have no detectable clinical focus.
Evaluating severity
Scoring systems (Table 5.3) should be used to stratify the risk of death from sepsis to inform urgency of
response. These guidelines apply to adult patients (>16 years) who are not pregnant or have not recently been
pregnant (past 4 weeks).
•	 HIGH RISK of severe illness or death from sepsis:
•	 NEWS2 ≥ 7 OR
Table 5.2  Clinical assessment of the patient with suspected sepsis.
History
Context: age, sex, comorbidities, medications, hospital or community acquired
Current major symptoms and their time course
Risk factors for sepsis? Consider immunosuppressive therapy, HIV infection, cancer, renal failure, liver failure, diabetes,
malnutrition, splenectomy, IV drug use, prosthetic heart valve, other prosthetic material, peripheral IV cannula, central
venous cannula, bladder catheter
Recent culture results?
Recent surgery or invasive procedures?
Recent foreign travel?
Contact with infectious disease? Any risk of exposure to a High Consequence Infectious Disease (HCID)?
Passed urine in the past 18 h?
Examination
Physiological observations
Head and neck: Neck stiffness? Jaundice? Mouth, teeth and sinuses: focus of infection? Lymphadenopathy?
Chest: Focal lung crackles/bronchial breathing? Pleural/pericardial rub? Heart murmur? Prosthetic heart valve?
Pacemaker/implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)?
Abdomen and pelvis: Distension? Ascites? Tenderness/guarding? Bladder catheter? Perineal/perianal abscess?
Limbs: Acute arthritis? Prosthetic joint? Abscess?
Skin and soft tissues: Rash/purpura? Pressure ulceration? Cellulitis? Soft-tissue infection? IV cannula/tunnelled line?

<!-- page:55 -->
36
Acute Medicine
•	 NEWS2 5 or 6 AND one of:
•	 Any one NEWS2 parameter with a score of 3
•	 Mottled or ashen appearance
•	 Non-blanching petechial or purpuric rash
•	 Cyanosis of skin, lips or tongue
•	 Deterioration since the last assessment
•	 Deterioration since any recent intervention
•	 Lactate >2 mmol/L OR known AKI
•	 MODERATE RISK of severe illness or death from sepsis:
•	 NEWS2 5 or 6 OR
•	 NEWS2 1–4 AND one of:
•	 Any one NEWS2 parameter with a score of 3
•	 Mottled or ashen appearance
•	 Non-blanching petechial or purpuric rash
•	 Cyanosis of skin, lips or tongue
•	 Deterioration since the last assessment
•	 Deterioration since any recent intervention
•	 LOW RISK of severe illness or death from sepsis
•	 NEWS2 1–4
Table 5.3  The NEWS2 scoring system (Royal College of Physicians, 2017).
Physiological
parameter
Score
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
Respiratory rate
(per minute)
≤8
9–11
12–20
21–24
≥25
SpO2 Scale 1 (%)
≤91
92–93
94–95
≥96
SpO2 Scale 2 (%)
≤83
84–85
86–87
88–92
≥93 on
room air
93–94 on
oxygen
95–96 on
oxygen
≥97
Air or oxygen?
Oxygen
Air
Systolic blood
pressure (mmHg)
≤90
91–100
101–110
111–219
≥220
Pulse (per minute)
≤40
41–50
51–90
91–110
111–130
≥131
Consciousness
Alert
CVPU
Temperature (°C)
≤35.0
35.1–36.0
36.1–38.0
38.1–39.0
≥39.1
C, confusion; V, voice; P, pain; U, unresponsive.
Use SpO2 Scale 2 if target oxygen range 88–92% (typically those at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure).
Table 5.4  NEWS2 trigger thresholds.
National Early Warning Score (NEWS2)
Frequency of monitoring
0
Minimum 12 hourly
Total 1–4
Minimum 4–6 hourly
3 in a single parameter
Minimum 1 hourly
Total 5 or more (urgent response threshold)
Minimum 1 hourly
Total 7 or more (emergency response threshold)
Continuous monitoring of vital signs

<!-- page:56 -->
Sepsis
37
Priorities
Manage patients with sepsis according to a sepsis bundle, for example the ‘Sepsis 6’.
1	 Obtain senior help:
Typically, a specialty registrar doctor or equivalent.
Involve relevant specialties early (ICU, Infectious Diseases/Microbiology, Radiology, Surgery) – allows for
judgement around antibiotics, targeted diagnostics, source control. May help to seek alternative diagnoses
or de-escalate care.
2	 Give oxygen if required:
Give targeted oxygen therapy if saturations are <92% – aiming for SpO2 ≥ 94%, or 88–92% in patients
at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure.
3	 Send bloods including cultures:
•	 Full blood count – the white cell count may be low in overwhelming bacterial sepsis; a low platelet count
may reflect disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
•	 U&Es – acute kidney injury (AKI)?
•	 LFTs – transaminitis? Evidence of biliary obstruction?
•	 Clotting – DIC?
•	 Blood glucose – hypoglycaemia can complicate sepsis, especially in patients with liver disease.
•	 Amylase – pancreatitis may be a sepsis mimic.
•	 Venous blood gas – acidosis? Hyperlactataemia? A raised lactate is an important marker of septic shock
and is associated with increased mortality (other causes include liver dysfunction, seizures, metformin and
salbutamol).
•	 Blood cultures and microbiology samples – see Table 5.5. Early confirmation of infection is from microscopy or Gram staining or PCR panels or antigen detection tests. Take blood cultures and cultures from
other relevant sites urgently in sepsis.
4	 Give IV antibiotics and consider source control:
Empiric broad spectrum, maximum dose. Where there is a clear source, use targeted antibiotics according
to local guidelines (Table 5.6). Consider allergy status and need for antivirals.
Start prompt antibiotic therapy as soon as blood is taken for culture:
•	 Within 1 h in patients at HIGH RISK of severe illness or death
•	 Within 3 h in patients at MODERATE RISK of severe illness or death
•	 Within 6 h in patients at LOW RISK of severe illness or death
If the source is amenable to drainage, this should occur within 12 h.
5	 Give IV fluids:
If systolic blood pressure is <90 mmHg and/or the serum lactate is >2 mmol/L, give crystalloid IV 500 mL
over 15 min using one, if necessary two, large bore (16 G or larger) cannulae. Give further IV fluid up to at
least 30 mL/kg if hypotension or hyperlactataemia persists.
6	 Monitor:
Sepsis is dynamic – is your patient improving?
Aim for a urine output >0.5 L/kg/h and consider a urinary catheter.
Recheck lactate – aiming for <2 mmol/L.
Serial monitoring of NEWS2 score (Tables 5.3 and 5.4).
If patients meeting the high-risk criteria do not respond within 1 h of any intervention, discuss with critical
care and ensure senior review in person.
Imaging should be included as part of your assessment: a chest X-ray should be performed, and consideration of further cross-sectional imaging if no likely source of infection identified after clinical examination and
initial tests. An ECG should be performed if aged >50, history of cardiac disease or suspicion of arrhythmia.

<!-- page:57 -->
38
Acute Medicine
Antimicrobials and stewardship
Principles of good antibiotic practice are given in Table 5.7. The antibiotic used should be guided by a hospital
protocol or an infection specialist based on the likely organism, taking account of the source of sepsis if known
(Table 5.6), whether the infection is community or hospital-acquired, results of previous isolates from the
patient and the local pattern of antibiotic resistance in patients.
Antibiotics should be given promptly, ideally after blood cultures are taken. Data from large observational
studies of patients with sepsis and shock have shown increased mortality with every hour delay in antibiotic
administration. Current guidelines recommend that antibiotics are administered within 1 h (of first
NEWS2 score on Emergency Department (ED) presentation or ward deterioration) in patients at
HIGH RISK of severe illness or death, within 3 h in patients at MODERATE RISK of severe illness or
death, and within 6 h in patients at LOW RISK of severe illness or death. This encourages rapid treatment of the most unwell patients, and more focussed treatment in clinically stable patients by using this time
to gather information for a more specific diagnosis.
Once the source of infection is confirmed or microbiological results are available the spectrum should be
narrowed. Change to oral therapy once the patient is improved, has been apyrexial for >24 h, is eating and
drinking and there is no evidence of a deep-seated infection. Review the need for continuing antibiotics early
and repeatedly: if the diagnosis of sepsis/infection is refuted the antibiotic should be stopped. Some antibiotics
Table 5.5  Microbiological tests in suspected sepsis.
Sample type
First-line tests
Second-line tests
(required in specific cases)
Blood
Peripheral blood cultures
Two sets (before antimicrobials provided it will not
lead to significant delays).
Positive in 30–50% and then associated with a worse
outcome. Volume is important – 8–10 ml/bottle
HIV serology
For example, malaria if travel history
Intravenous
catheter
Catheter blood culture (each lumen) paired with
peripheral. Consider removal of catheter and MC&S
of tip if the patient is in septic shock and deteriorating
Urine
Urinalysis
Microscopy, culture and sensitivity. If catheterised,
consider changing catheter and sending catheterspecimen of urine from new catheter.
Urine legionella antigen
Cerebrospinal
fluid
—
Microscopy, culture and sensitivity
Pneumococcal/meningococcal PCR
Nose and
throat
—
Respiratory viral PCR panel
SARS-CoV-2/influenza PCR or
point-of-care tests
Sputum
—
Microscopy, culture and sensitivity
Once intubated a deep, non-directed
or bronchoscopic-directed washing
has greater sensitivity and specificity
Acid-fast bacilli
Pus/tissue
—
Microscopy, culture and sensitivity
Stool
—
Bacterial culture/PCR
Clostridioides difficile testing

<!-- page:58 -->
Sepsis
39
require drug-level monitoring, for example gentamicin or vancomycin (in severe penicillin allergy or for treatment of methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA] infection).
Duration of antibiotics will depend on the source of sepsis. Shorter courses (e.g. five days) are often safe if
clinical resolution has occurred. In some situations, prolonged courses are necessary, for example infective
endocarditis, lung abscess or bone infection: seek advice from an infection specialist.
Table 5.6  The example of initial antibiotic therapy regime for adult sepsis (excludes penicillin-allergic patients).
Always seek local guidance and check doses in the British National Formulary.
Suspected source of sepsis
Initial antibiotic therapy (IV, high dose if septic shock)
Bacterial meningitis
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV BD. If immunocompromised or age > 60 y,
consider amoxicillin 2 g IV q 4-hourly to cover listeria
Community-acquired pneumonia
Severe (CURB 65 ≥ 2): co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds plus
clarithromycin 500 mg PO/IV
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds
Infective endocarditis
Take 3 sets of cultures, ideally 2–4 h apart. Discuss with
ID/micro prior to starting antibiotics (see Table 5.5)
Urinary tract infection
Complicated/healthcare-associated/pyelonephritis:
co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV
Intra-abdominal sepsis, for example
appendicitis, peritonitis
Seek advice for other conditions, for example
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds plus metronidazole 500 mg IV tds
Suspected vascular catheter-related
bloodstream infection
Remove suspected infected line after
alternative vascular access established
Vancomycin IV plus flucloxacillin 2 g IV qds plus stat
gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV
Septic arthritis (native joint)
Seek advice for prosthetic joint or metalwork
infection
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds
Cellulitis
Flucloxacillin 2 g IV qds
Necrotising fasciitis
Discuss urgently with infection/plastic surgeon
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g IV tds plus clindamycin 900 mg IV qds
plus vancomycin IV (in MRSA-positive patients)
No localising signs: neutropenic
Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV qds
Meropenem 1 g IV tds in patients on high-dose
methotrexate protocols (≥1 g/m2)
No localising signs: not neutropenic
Amoxicillin 1 g IV tds plus gentamicin 5 mg/kg IV
Table 5.7  Good practice in antimicrobial prescribing for sepsis.
Antibiotics should be administered promptly (within 1, 3 or 6 h depending on severity)
Antibiotics should target the likely source of infection (Table 5.6)
Empiric ‘broad spectrum’ antibiotics should be used when the source is unknown
Consider whether the infection is community-acquired or healthcare-associated, any previously known culture results
and the patient’s allergy status when selecting antimicrobials
The first dose should be prescribed as a timed ‘stat’ and the need for urgent administration should be communicated
to nursing staff
The indication for the antibiotics should be documented as well as a review and stop date
Antibiotics should be focussed as soon as it is safe to do so by narrowing the spectrum and converting to oral therapy

<!-- page:59 -->
40
Acute Medicine
To avoid the development of resistance and the development of healthcare-associated infection (e.g.
Clostridioides difficile diarrhoea) antibiotics should not be overused: document the indication for the drug and
review the need for continuing antibiotics early and repeatedly.
Further management
Hypotension and organ dysfunction (see Chapter 2)
Management requires invasive monitoring and critical care expertise.
Arterial and central venous monitoring will be required if the patient is in septic shock or once in the ICU but
placement should not delay initial priorities.
The first priority is adequate fluid resuscitation, using a balanced crystalloid (e.g. Hartmann’s solution). Aim
for at least 30 mL/kg of IV crystalloid in the first 3 h of resuscitation. This will be guided by a clinical assessment
of the circulation and tissue perfusion. Dynamic measures can guide adequacy of fluid resuscitation: cardiac
output monitoring (stroke volume, stroke volume variation and pulse pressure variation), response to passive
leg raising, echocardiography.
If the patient remains hypotensive despite adequate fluid correction, start norepinephrine (dose range
0.05–1.0 μg/kg/min). This must be administered via a central line. Aim for mean arterial pressure > 65 mmHg.
The goal is to restore tissue perfusion. Monitor with:
•	 Vital signs, capillary refill time, pulse and skin findings
•	 Urine output (aim for >0.5 mL/kg/h)
•	 Arterial lactate (aim for normalization)
•	 Central venous O2 saturation (ScvO2) (aim for >70%)
If evidence of end-organ hypoperfusion persists, perform a bedside echocardiogram and/or measure the
cardiac output. Consider measures to improve oxygen delivery, such as transfusion of packed red cells or
adding inotropic therapy, for example dobutamine.
Respiratory support
Mechanical ventilation in sepsis is indicated for:
•	 Severe acidosis
•	 Multi-organ failure
•	 Reduced consciousness
•	 Respiratory failure, for example due to pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). ARDS is
characterised by acute-onset hypoxia and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates in the absence of a cardiac cause
(excluded by pulmonary artery occlusion pressure measurement or echocardiography).
The principles of ARDS management include:
•	 Mechanical ventilation with positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) and low tidal volumes (6 mL/kg predicted
body weight)
•	 A conservative fluid regimen
•	 Ventilation in the prone position for moderate or severe ARDS
•	 Neuromuscular blocking drugs for severe ARDS
High-flow nasal oxygen (HFNO) therapy may be used in sepsis-induced hypoxaemic respiratory failure and
may be available outside HDU/ICU on some wards. This can achieve airflows as high as 60 L/min and inspired
oxygen fractions of 95–100%.

<!-- page:60 -->
Sepsis
41
Acute kidney injury (see Chapter 86)
AKI is common in sepsis and is associated with a worse outcome.
The principles of treatment of AKI in sepsis are:
•	 Rule out additional obstruction
•	 Optimise fluid replacement and correction of tissue perfusion
•	 Consider renal replacement (usually with continuous veno-venous haemofiltration or intermittent
haemodialysis) for refractory oliguria, fluid overload, acidosis, hyperkalaemia or azotaemia
Source control
When a persisting source of sepsis exists, it is unlikely that antibiotics alone will be effective. Consider empyema, appendicitis, pyelonephrosis, necrotizing fasciitis. Indwelling cannulae, especially central venous lines,
should be removed (and the tip sent for culture). Involve surgical teams/interventional radiology early if the
source of infection is amenable to intervention.
Problems
Sepsis in the neutropenic patient (see Chapter 74)
Consider neutropenic sepsis in people who become unwell and have had systemic anticancer treatment in the
last 30 days or are receiving some immunosuppressive treatments. Patients with some haematological malignancies (e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) or acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) or a bone marrow failure
syndrome e.g. myelodysplastic syndrome) or recipients of haematopoietic stem cell transplants are at risk of
neutropenic sepsis.
Patients with neutrophil counts <0.5 × 109/L are at high risk of bacterial infection, particularly from Gramnegative rods and S. aureus and epidermidis. If the neutropenic patient has a temperature of >37.5 °C or
other features compatible with sepsis (including, but not limited to, tachycardia, hypothermia, hypotension,
confusion and diarrhoea) consider neutropenic sepsis and start empiric broad spectrum antibiotic therapy.
Search for a focus of infection. Examination should include the entire skin including the perineum and perianal
region, indwelling IV lines and other IV sites, and the mouth, teeth and sinuses. Investigations required urgently
are given in Table 5.5.
Sepsis associated with IV drug use
Several causes of fever must be considered (Table 5.8). Right-sided endocarditis may not give rise to abnormal
cardiac signs. Antibiotic therapy must cover Staphylococci.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
DIC is a complication of sepsis (as well as a number of non-infective disorders). This should be suspected in
patients with sepsis and in patients with septic shock who develop purpura, prolonged oozing from puncture
sites, bleeding from surgical wounds or bleeding from the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts. Confirm by a

<!-- page:61 -->
42
Acute Medicine
low platelet count (<100 × 1012/L), prolonged prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin times, and
a  high plasma concentration of fibrin degradation products. Ask for advice on management from a
haematologist.
If there is active bleeding or a significant invasive procedure (i.e. surgery or radiological drainage) is needed,
give fresh frozen plasma and platelet concentrate, although this is not usually necessary for invasive lines in the
ICU (seek specialist advice). There is no conclusive evidence for the use of heparin in the treatment of DIC, but
this should be considered if there is thromboembolism. Give vitamin K 10 mg IV to reverse possible vitamin K
deficiency which may contribute to the coagulopathy, although there is no evidence base addressing this
specific question in sepsis.
Further reading
Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. (2021) Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for
management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med 49, e1063–e1143.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2024) Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and
early management. NICE guideline NG51. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51.
Royal College of Physicians (2017) National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2: standardising the assessment of
acute-illness severity in the NHS. Updated report of a working party. https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/
file/8636/download.
Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, et al. (2016) Assessment of clinical criteria for sepsis: for the Third
International Consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 315, 762–774.
Shankar-Hari M, Phillips GS, Levy ML, et al. (2016) Developing a new definition and assessing new clinical
criteria for septic shock: For the Third International Consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock
(Sepsis-3). JAMA 315, 775–787.
Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. (2016) The Third International Consensus definitions for
sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 315, 801–810.
Standards Unit, Specialised Microbiology and Laboratories, UK Health Security Agency (2023) UK Standards
for Microbiology Investigations: Sepsis and systemic or disseminated infections. https://www.rcpath.org/
static/aae2df9a-72c9-4bf3-8e686eaa4d9d5ef9/a14bbad5-1638-46d0-82fd84d122d4abd2/uk-smi-s-12i1review-of-users-comments-sepsis-and-systemic-or-disseminated-infections-january-2023-pdf.pdf.
UK Health Security Agency (2024) Start smart then focus: antimicrobial stewardship toolkit for inpatient care
settings. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/antimicrobial-stewardship-start-smart-then-focus/
start-smart-then-focus-antimicrobial-stewardship-toolkit-for-inpatient-care-settings.
Table 5.8  Possible causes of fever associated with IV drug use.
Infection at injection sites
Thrombophlebitis
Endocarditis (especially right-sided) (which may be complicated by septic pulmonary embolism)
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Hepatitis B or C
Septic arthritis
Pyrogen reaction
HIV-related infection, for example cryptococcal meningitis, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
