# CHAPTER 8 Poisoning

- Pages: 71-80
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:71 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
52
•	 In the United Kingdom, information on poisons and their management can be found:
•	 On the TOXBASE website (www.toxbase.org); username and password required.
•	 Via the National Poisons Information Service (NPIS) for complex and severe poisoning; 24-h phone line, 0344
8 920 111.
Management of the unconscious patient with suspected poisoning:
1	 Stabilize the airway, breathing and circulation.
•	 See Chapters 1 and 105 for airway management, Chapters 30 and 113 for respiratory failure management and Chapter 2 for the management of hypotension and shock.
2	 Exclude and correct hypoglycaemia
•	 If blood glucose is <4.0 mmol/L, give 100 mL of 20% glucose, 200 mL of 10% glucose over 15–30 min IV,
or glucagon 1 mg IV/IM/SC.
•	 Recheck blood glucose after 10 min; if still <4.0 mmol/L, repeat the above IV glucose treatment (see
Chapter 46).
•	 In patients with malnourishment or alcohol misuse, there is a remote risk of precipitating Wernicke
encephalopathy by administering a glucose load; prevent this by giving thiamine 100 mg IV
concurrently.
3	 Treat prolonged or recurrent major seizures
•	 Be mindful of pre-hospital treatment already administered.
•	 Give lorazepam (less likely to cause respiratory suppression) 0.1 mg/kg (typically 4–8 mg) IV over 5–10 min
(Chapter 57), midazolam 10 mg buccally (NICE-recommended, but only licensed in patients <18 years),
or diazepam 10–20 mg IV at a rate of <2.5 mg/min (faster administration carries the risk of sudden
apnoea).
•	 Give a second dose for ongoing seizures, to a maximum total dose of lorazepam 8 mg or diazepam 40 mg
(see Chapter 57).
4	 If opioid poisoning is suspected or must be excluded, give naloxone
•	 If the respiratory rate is <12/min, pupils are pinpoint, or other indication to suspect opioid poisoning, give
naloxone 800 μgm IV every 2–3 min; up to a total dose of 4000 μgm or until the respiratory rate is >15/min
(aim is reversal of respiratory depression but not full reversal of consciousness).
•	 If there is a response to bolus naloxone, start an IV infusion: make up a naloxone solution with 10 mg
naloxone (25 vials) made up to a final volume of 50 mL with glucose 5% (200 μgm/mL); start the infusion
at 60% of the initial dose required for resuscitation per hour and titrate against the respiratory rate and
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS).
Poisoning
Nigel Langford and Keisha Patel
CHAPTER 8

<!-- page:72 -->
Poisoning
53
•	 In patients who have taken partial opioid agonists (e.g. buprenorphine, methadone and tramadol),
repeated large (1200 μgm) doses of naloxone may be required to achieve a satisfactory response.
•	 A lack of response to naloxone suggests that another Central nervous System (CNS) depressant has been
taken or brain injury has occurred.
5	 Obtain the history from all available sources (e.g. ambulance crew, family etc.).
6	 Make a systematic examination:
•	 Clinical features may provide clues to the poison (Tables  8.1 and  8.2), but keep in mind that mixed
poisoning is common.
•	 There is also the possibility of multiple pathologies (e.g. poisoning followed by head injury).
•	 Is there evidence of IV substance use? Check for needle marks and complications of IV substance use
(e.g. venous thrombosis and cellulitis).
•	 Check for possible complications of a coma (hypothermia, pressure necrosis of skin or muscle, corneal
abrasions and inhalation pneumonia).
7	 Investigations
•	 Should be sent/obtained urgently and may help identify poisons taken (see Table 8.3).
•	 Urine is preferable to blood for qualitative analysis as toxins are concentrated in the urine.
8	 Discuss management with an intensivist and arrange admission to ICU if:
•	 The GCS < 8 (may need intubation as may be unable to protect their airway), respiratory failure despite
antidote administration, or there are recurrent seizures.
•	 There are major arrhythmias, or the patient is at high risk of arrhythmias (e.g. tricyclic poisoning with
broad QRS complex).
•	 There is hypotension or severe acidosis (pH < 7.2) not responding to fluid resuscitation.
Table 8.1  Clues to the poison (1): clinical and biochemical features.
Feature
Poisons to consider
Coma
Barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethanol, opioids, trichloroethanol, tricyclics
Seizures
Amphetamines, cocaine, dextropropoxyphene, insulin, oral hypoglycaemics,
phenothiazines, theophylline, tricyclics, lead
Miosis
Opioids, organophosphates, trichloroethanol
Mydriasis
Amphetamines, cocaine, phenothiazines, quinine, sympathomimetics, tricyclics
Arrhythmias
Anti-arrhythmics, anticholinergics, phenothiazines, quinine, sympathomimetics, tricyclics
Hypertension
Amphetamines, cocaine
Pulmonary oedema
Carbon monoxide, ethylene glycol, irritant gases, opioids, organophosphates, paraquat,
salicylates, tricyclics
Ketones on breath
Ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, alcoholic or starvation ketoacidosis
Hypothermia
Barbiturates, ethanol, opioids, tricyclics
Hyperthermia
Amphetamines, MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), anticholinergics,
cocaine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Hypoglycaemia
Insulin, oral hypoglycaemics, ethanol, salicylates
Hyperglycaemia
Theophylline, organophosphates, salbutamol
Acute kidney injury
Amanita phalloides, ethylene glycol, paracetamol, salicylates, prolonged hypotension,
rhabdomyolysis
Hypokalaemia
Salbutamol, salicylates, theophylline
Metabolic acidosis
Carbon monoxide, ethanol, ethylene glycol, methanol, paracetamol, salicylates, tricyclics
Raised plasma osmolality
Ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropyl alcohol, methanol
Rhabdomyolysis
Carbon monoxide, ethanol, opioids, solvents
MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (‘ecstasy’).

<!-- page:73 -->
54
Acute Medicine
Management of the conscious patient with poisoning
1	 Check baseline observations including GCS and blood glucose.
2	 Establish:
•	 Which poisons were taken, when, over what time period and the quantity.
•	 Current symptoms and if the patient has vomited since ingestion (unlikely to have eliminated significant
amounts of poison if over an hour from ingestion).
•	 Associated physical and psychiatric illness.
Table 8.2  Clues to the poison (2): toxidromes.
Toxidrome
HR
BP
RR
T
GCS
Pupil
size
Sweat
Comments
Sympathomimetic
(cocaine, cathinones, amphetamines,
some novel psychoactive substances)
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
Electrolyte disturbances and
rhabdomyolysis
Anticholinergic
(hyoscine, antidepressants,
diphenhydramine, antipsychotics)
↑
(↑)
↓
↑
↓
↑
↓
Urinary retention
Cholinergic
(organophosphorous sarin, VX)
—
—
(—)
(—)
↓
↑
Vomiting, diarrhoea, urinary
incontinence, hypersalivation
Opioid
(morphine, fentanyl, oxycodone,
codeine, methadone, buprenorphine)
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
Monitor GCS/AVPU as naloxone
only short acting
Sedative hypnotic
(benzodiazepines, ‘Z’ hypnotics)
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
(↑)
↓
Monitor GCS/AVPU
Serotonin syndrome
(SSRI, SNRI lithium)
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
Check for myoclonus; short onset
and duration of events
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(antipsychotics)
↑
(↑)
—
↑
↓
(↑)
↑
↑ muscle tone and rhabdomyolysis;
long duration of events
Alcohol withdrawal
(alcohol)
↑
—
(—)
(↑)
(↑)
↑
↑
Use CIWA-Ar/GMAWS to
objectively monitor and respond to
withdrawal
Opioid withdrawal
(opioids)
↑
(—)
(↑)
(↑)
(↑)
↑
↑
Consider using COWS to
objectively monitor and respond to
withdrawal
HR, heart rate; BP, blood pressure; RR, respiratory rate; T, temperature; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
↓ reduction in effect, () qualified change in effect, ↑ increase in effect, − no change
Table 8.3  Urgent investigation of the patient with poisoning.
Bloods: glucose, sodium, potassium, urea, creatinine, plasma osmolality*, full blood count, paracetamol level
(if indicated), arterial/venous blood gas and pH
Urinalysis (myoglobinuria due to rhabdomyolysis gives a positive stick test for blood)
Chest X-ray
ECG
If the substance ingested is not known, save serum (10 mL) and urine (50 mL) at 4 °C in case later analysis is needed
* Normal plasma osmolality 280–300 mOsmol/kg. If the measured plasma osmolality exceeds calculated osmolality
(formula [2(Na + K) + urea + glucose]) by 10 mOsmol/kg or more, consider poisoning with ethanol, ethylene glycol,
isopropyl alcohol or methanol.

<!-- page:74 -->
Poisoning
55
3	 Investigations
•	 Dependent upon the poisons taken – check plasma levels (Table 8.4).
4	 If the patient is at risk of harm but refuses treatment
Consult and senior colleague and psychiatrist (see Chapter 104 for further information on mental capacity
and consent to treatment).
Further management
Is a specific antidote or treatment indicated?
See Table 8.5 for antidotes – if you are unfamiliar with the poison/antidote, discuss the case with the Poisons
Centre as some antidotes may be harmful if given inappropriately.
Reducing absorption
•	 Activated charcoal
•	 50 g mixed with 200 mL of water should be given if a significant amount of any poison has been ingested
within 1 h (or longer if modified-release preparations or drugs with anticholinergic effects have been
taken), and oral antidotes are not indicated (Table 8.6); unless substance is poorly absorbed by charcoal.
•	 High risk of inhalation therefore it should not be given to a patient with a reduced conscious level unless
the airway is protected by a cuffed endotracheal tube.
•	 Gastric lavage should not be employed in the management of poisoned patients, as the risks of complications outweigh any benefits.
Table 8.4  Poisoning in which plasma levels should be measured.
Poison
Plasma level at which specific
treatment is indicated
Treatment
Aspirin and other
250–500 mg/L (mild poisoning)
Fluids
Salicylates
500–750 mg/L (moderate poisoning)
750–1000 mg/L (severe poisoning)
>1000 mg/L (massive poisoning)
Urinary alkalinization
HD
HD
Digoxin
>4 ng/mL
Digoxin-specific antibody fragments
Ethylene glycol
>500 mg/L
Ethanol or 4-methyl pyrazole, HD
Iron*
>3.5 mg/L
Desferrioxamine
Lithium
>5 mmol/L
HD
Methanol
>500 mg/L
Ethanol or 4-methyl pyrazole, HD
Paracetamol
See Appendix 36.1
Acetylcysteine
Theophylline
>50 mg/L
RAC, HD
Carbamazepine
>40 mg/L (170 micromol/L)
MDAC, consider lipid emulsion for cardiac toxicity
HD, haemodialysis; RAC, repeated oral-activated charcoal.
NB: Always check the units of measurement used by your laboratory.
* Also measure plasma iron level if clinical evidence of severe iron toxicity (hypotension, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea) or
after massive ingestion (>20 mg elemental iron/kg body weight; one 20 mg tablet of ferrous sulphate contains 6 mg
elemental iron).

<!-- page:75 -->
56
Acute Medicine
Increasing elimination
•	 Repeated dosing with activated charcoal may help eliminate some substances (Table 8.6). Give 50 g initially
then 25 g 4-hourly by mouth or nasogastric tube until recovery or until plasma drug levels have fallen to
within the safe range. Laxatives may also be required.
•	 Other methods (e.g. haemodialysis) may be indicated in selected cases, after discussion with a Poisons
Centre.
Table 8.5  Specific antidotes.
Poison
Antidote
Anticholinergic agents
Physostigmine
Arsenic
Dimercaprol
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil
Beta-blockers
Glucagon
Calcium antagonists
Calcium gluconate
Cyanide
Dicobalt edetate alone or sodium nitrite + sodium thiosulphate
Dabigatran
Idarucizumab
Digoxin
Digoxin-specific antibody fragments
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol or 4-methylpyrazole
Fluoride
Calcium gluconate
Buproprion, local anaesthetics
Lipid emulsion (Intralipid®)
Iron
Desferrioxamine
Lead and Mercury
Dimercaprol or penicillamine
Methanol
Ethanol or 4-methylpyrazole
Opioids
Naloxone
Organophosphates
Atropine
Paracetamol
Acetylcysteine (Appendix 8.1)
Thallium
Berlin blue
Warfarin
Vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma or prothrombin complex concentrate
Table 8.6  Charcoal administration after poisoning.
Repeated dosing indicated
Single dose indicated (only within
the first hour after presentation)
Charcoal not indicated
Barbiturates
Carbamazepine
Dapsone
Digoxin
Phenytoin
Quinine
Sustained-release
preparations
Theophylline
Antihistamines
Paracetamol
Salicylates
Tricyclics
Acids
Alkalis
Carbamate
Cyanide
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Hydrocarbons
Iron
Lithium
Methanol
Organophosphates

<!-- page:76 -->
Poisoning
57
Monitoring & Supportive Care
In all patients with severe poisoning, monitor:
•	 GCS/level of consciousness.
•	 Oxygen saturations and heart rate/ECG via continuous monitoring.
•	 RR and BP (initially every 15 min); temperature and urine output (hourly).
•	 Arterial blood gases and pH (initially 2-hourly) if the poison can cause metabolic acidosis (Table 8.1) or there
is suspected acute respiratory distress syndrome or after inhalation injury.
•	 Blood glucose if the poison may cause hypo- or hyperglycaemia (initially hourly) or in paracetamol poisoning
presenting after 16 h (initially 4-hourly).
•	 Monitoring should be continued until the time symptoms are likely to develop has passed or until the patient has
recovered. Prolonged observation may be required for patients who have taken sustained-release medication.
•	 Management of problems seen after poisoning is summarised in Table 8.7.
Psychiatric assessment
•	 All patients with deliberate self-poisoning should have a psychiatric assessment, performed when recovered
from the physical effects of the poisoning. Factors to consider:
•	 The circumstances of the overdose: carefully planned, indecisive or impulsive; taken alone or in the presence of another person; action taken to avoid intervention or discovery; suicidal intent admitted?
Table 8.7  Problems encountered in the patient with poisoning.
Problem
Comment and management
Coma
If associated with focal neurological signs or evidence of head injury, CT must be done to exclude
intracranial haematoma.
Cerebral
oedema
May occur after cardiac arrest, in severe carbon monoxide poisoning, in acute liver failure from
paracetamol (Chapter 42), and in MDMA poisoning, due to hyponatraemia. Results in hypertension
and dilated pupils. Give mannitol 20% 100–200 mL (0.5 g/kg) IV over 10 min, provided urine
output is >30 mL/h. Check plasma osmolality: further mannitol may be given until plasma
osmolality is 320 mOsmol/kg Hyperventilate to a PCO2 of 4 kPa (30 mmHg)
Seizures
Due to toxin or metabolic complications. Check blood glucose, arterial gases and pH, plasma
sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium. Treat prolonged or recurrent major fits with diazepam
IV up to 20 mg. See Chapter 57 for further management.
Respiratory
depression
Half-life of most opioids is longer than that of naloxone and repeated doses or an infusion may be
required. Elective ventilation may be preferable.
Inhalation
pneumonia
Treatment includes tracheobronchial suction, consideration of bronchoscopy to remove particulate
matter from the airways, physiotherapy and antibiotic therapy (Chapter 25).
Hypotension
Usually reflects vasodilatation, but always consider other causes (e.g. gastrointestinal bleeding).
Obtain an ECG if the patient has taken a cardiotoxic poison, has known cardiac disease, and if
hypotension does not respond to IV fluids.
Arrhythmias
Due to toxin or metabolic complications. Check arterial gases and pH, and plasma potassium,
calcium and magnesium. See Chapter 13 for further management.
Acute kidney
injury
May be due to prolonged hypotension, nephrotoxic poison, haemolysis or rhabdomyolysis. See
Chapter 86 for further management.
Gastric stasis
Place a nasogastric tube in comatose patients to reduce the risk of regurgitation and inhalation.
Hypothermia
Usually managed by passive rewarming. See Chapter 9.
MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (‘ecstasy’).

<!-- page:77 -->
58
Acute Medicine
•	 Past history of self-poisoning or self-injury; psychiatric history or contact with psychiatric services; alcohol
or substance use disorder and current mental state,
•	 Family history of depression or suicide.
•	 Patients at increased risk of suicide (Table 8.8) and those with overt psychiatric illness should be discussed
with a psychiatrist. Follow-up by the primary care physician or psychiatric services should be arranged before
discharge.
Paracetamol poisoning
•	 Hepatotoxicity may occur after a single ingestion of >150 mg/kg paracetamol taken in <1 h; and is more
likely if there is hepatic enzyme induction due to chronic alcohol use or drug therapy (e.g. carbamazepine),
or if there is depletion of hepatic glutathione (e.g. anorexia).
•	 Acetylcysteine (AC) replenishes hepatic glutathione and is the mainstay treatment (Table 8.9).
•	 For patients weighing >110 kg (body mass index > 30), use a body weight of 110 kg rather than actual body
weight when calculating dose of paracetamol ingested in mg/kg.
•	 Plasma paracetamol level is a poor guide to the risk of hepatotoxicity in patients with staggered poisoning
(overdose taken over a period of longer than 1 h or multiple ingestions within a 24-h period). If the total
amount taken is >150 mg/kg in a 24-h period, or the patient is at increased risk of liver damage, acetylcysteine should be given empirically.
•	 Management (Figure 8.1) is dependent on the amount ingested over what time, and the time since ingestion that the patient presents to services.
Minor reactions to acetylcysteine (nausea, flushing, urticaria and pruritus) are relatively common, and usually
settle when the peak rate of infusion is passed. If there is a severe reaction (angioedema, wheezing, respiratory
distress, hypotension or hypertension), stop the infusion and give an antihistamine (chlorphenamine 10 mg IV
over 10 min). Then re-start the acetylcysteine infusion at the lowest rate.
Table 8.8  Patients with self-poisoning at high risk of suicide.
Middle-aged or elderly male
Widowed/divorced/separated or living alone
Unemployed
Chronic physical illness or psychiatric illness, especially depression
Alcohol or substance abuse
Circumstances of poisoning: massive; planned; taken alone; timed – intervention or discovery unlikely
Suicide note written or suicidal intent admitted
Table 8.9  Acetylcysteine (AC) regimen in paracetamol poisoning.
Traditional 21-h Infusion
150 mg/kg in 200 mL glucose 5% IV over 1 h, then
50 mg/kg in 500 mL glucose 5% IV over 4 h, then
100 mg/kg in 1 L glucose 5% IV over 16 h
New 12-h SNAP Regimen
100 mg/kg in 200 mL glucose 5% IV over 2 h, then
200 mg/kg in 1 L glucose 5% IV over 10 h

<!-- page:78 -->
Poisoning
59
Patient was seen within 8 h after poisoning
•	 Give activated charcoal 50 g if <1 h since ingestion and > 75 mg/kg paracetamol has been ingested.
•	 Take blood for plasma paracetamol level at or after 4 h since ingestion.
•	 If the plasma paracetamol concentration at four or more hours post ingestion is less than the paracetamol
treatment line, the patient is asymptomatic and the investigations are normal, there is no risk of serious
complications, and the patient may be discharged following psychiatric assessment.
•	 Start acetylcysteine (AC) if the plasma paracetamol level is above the treatment line (graph of plasma levels
and treatment threshold can be found on TOXBASE).
•	 If the plasma paracetamol level is not available by 8 h, begin AC if >75 mg/kg of paracetamol has been
taken; discontinue AC if the plasma paracetamol level is then found to be below the treatment line.
Paracetamol poisoning
Time since ingestion?
0–8 h
0–24 h
>24 h or
staggered poisoning
(0–8 h)
(0–24 h)
*Nausea and vomiting > 24 h after ingestion, right subcostal pain and tenderness.
On completion of AC course, reassess clinical status and check/recheck blood tests above
(>24 h ...)
Check plasma paracetamol level, prothrombin
time, ALT/AST, bilirubin, phosphate, creatinine,
acid–base status (venous sample) and FBC
If <1 h since ingestion and
>75 mg/kg taken, give activated
charcoal 50 g PO
Give AC course if plasma
paracetamol level is above
treatment line
If level is not available by
8 h after ingestion, and
>75 mg/kg taken, start
AC: stop if level is below
treatment line
No clinical features of liver
damage*, normal blood results
Clinical features of liver damage*,
or abnormal blood results
Medically ﬁt for discharge
Psychiatric assessment
Discuss with Liver Unit
See Chapter 42 for management
of acute liver failure
Start AC if >75 mg/kg
taken: stop AC if plasma
paracetamol level is below
treatment line
Give AC course if
>150 mg/kg taken, or
there are clinical features
of liver damage*, or
abnormal results
Figure 8.1  Management of paracetamol poisoning.

<!-- page:79 -->
60
Acute Medicine
•	 On completion of AC treatment, check the prothrombin time, alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase
activities and plasma creatinine.
•	 If the patient is asymptomatic post AC treatment and the investigation results are normal (INR < 1.3,
ALT < 2 × upper limit normal, creatinine normal), there is no risk of serious complications, and the patient
may be discharged after psychiatric assessment.
Patient seen 8–24 h after poisoning
•	 Take blood for plasma paracetamol level, prothrombin time, alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase
activities, plasma creatinine and bilirubin, acid–base status (venous sample) and full blood count.
•	 Start AC immediately if >75 mg/kg paracetamol has been taken; discontinue AC if the plasma paracetamol
level is below the treatment line.
•	 On completion of AC treatment repeat the above investigations; if the investigations are abnormal or if the
patient is symptomatic, consider continuing AC treatment until recovery (INR < 1.3, or falling on two consecutive tests and < 3.0).
•	 If the patient is asymptomatic following treatment and the investigation results are normal (INR < 1.3,
ALT < 2 × upper limit normal, creatinine normal), there is little risk of serious complications; the patient may
be discharged after psychiatric assessment.
Patient seen >24 h after overdose
•	 Take blood on admission for plasma paracetamol level, prothrombin time, alanine transaminase/aspartate
transaminase activities, plasma creatinine, bilirubin and phosphate, acid–base status (venous sample),
glucose and full blood count.
•	 If the patient has taken >150 mg/kg paracetamol, is symptomatic, or has abnormal investigation results, give
AC treatment.
•	 Repeat the above investigations at the end of the AC course.
•	 Normal blood tests at 24 h indicate that serious liver toxicity has not occurred, and treatment can be discontinued; the patient may be discharged after psychiatric assessment.
Severe hepatotoxicity
Make early contact with a Liver Unit if the patient has evidence of severe hepatotoxicity (Table 8.10). In such
patients (before transfer):
•	 Start a course of acetylcysteine if not previously administered.
•	 Give glucose 10% 1 L 12-hourly IV to prevent hypoglycaemia, and monitor blood glucose 4-hourly.
Table 8.10  Paracetamol poisoning: indications of severe hepatotoxicity.
Rapid development of grade 2 encephalopathy (confused but able to answer questions)
Prothrombin time >20 s at 24 h, >45 s at 48 h or >50 s at 72 h
Increasing plasma bilirubin
Increasing plasma creatinine
Falling plasma phosphate
Arterial pH <7.3 more than 24 h after ingestion

<!-- page:80 -->
Poisoning
61
•	 Monitor conscious level 4-hourly.
•	 Monitor CVP and urine output: correct hypovolaemia with crystalloid.
•	 Check prothrombin time 12-hourly and plasma creatinine daily.
•	 Start prophylaxis against gastric stress ulceration with omeprazole 40 mg daily IV by mouth or by
nasogastric tube.
•	 See Chapter 42 for other aspects of the management of acute liver failure.
Carbon monoxide poisoning
•	 May occur from inhalation of car exhaust fumes, fumes from inadequately maintained or ventilated
heating systems, smoke from all types of fires and methylene chloride in paint strippers (by hepatic
metabolism).
•	 The severity of poisoning depends on the concentration of carbon monoxide in the inspired air, the length
of exposure and the presence of anaemia or cardiorespiratory disease. Clinical features of acute poisoning
are given in Table 8.11.
•	 If carbon monoxide poisoning is suspected, give 100% oxygen (10 L/min) using a tightly fitting facemask with
a circuit that minimizes rebreathing. Unconscious patients should be intubated and ventilated mechanically
with 100% oxygen.
•	 Cerebral oedema may occur and is treated with mannitol and mild hyperventilation.
•	 Attach an ECG monitor and record a 12-lead ECG. Severe poisoning may result in myocardial ischaemia,
with anginal chest pain, ST segment depression and arrhythmias. Check arterial blood gases and pH
(metabolic acidosis is usually present) and arrange a chest X-ray.
•	 Check the carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb) level in blood (most arterial blood gas analysers will do this). If acute
carbon monoxide poisoning is confirmed (COHb > 10%), recheck 2-hourly and continue 100% oxygen until
two consecutive samples contain <5%.
•	 Although its effectiveness is disputed, generally accepted indications for hyperbaric oxygen therapy are:
•	 Carboxyhaemoglobin level >40% at any time
•	 Coma
•	 Neurological symptoms or signs other than mild headache
•	 Evidence of myocardial ischaemia or arrhythmias
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Contact a Poisons Centre to discuss the management of severe poisoning and for the location of the nearest
centre which can provide hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
Table 8.11  Acute carbon monoxide poisoning: clinical features.
Blood carboxyhaemoglobin (%)
Clinical features that may be seen
<10
No symptoms – acute poisoning excluded if exposure was within 4 h
10–50
Headache, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, tachypnoea
>50
Coma, fits, cardiorespiratory arrest
