# CHAPTER 9 Hypothermia

- Pages: 81-84
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:81 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
62
Hypothermia is defined as a core temperature below 35 °C, causing vital functions to drop to the point of
cardiac arrest. Exposure to cold (e.g. outdoor activities, homelessness and substance abuse) results in primary
hypothermia, whilst illness and other external causes (e.g. elderly and multimorbidity) result in secondary
hypothermia.
Severity of hypothermia can be classified based on the patient’s core temperature (Table 9.1) but also on
clinical signs if unable to measure the core temperature (Table 9.2). Urgent investigations to consider in hypothermia are listed in Table 9.3. Management is summarized in Figure 9.1.
Hypothermia
Rand Alkaissy and Tom Cibulskas
CHAPTER 9
Table 9.1  Classification of severity of hypothermia.
Stage
Clinical signs*
Core temperature
Hypothermia I (mild)
Conscious, shivering
35–32 °C
Hypothermia II (moderate)
Impaired consciousness, may be shivering
32–28 °C
Hypothermia III (severe)
Unconscious, not shivering, vital signs present
<28 °C
Hypothermia IV (severe)
Vital signs absent
Variable
* Clinical findings may be diminished in comorbidity or drugs regardless of core temperature.
Table 9.2  Rewarming methods.
Method
Treatment
Passive external
rewarming (HT I)
Place patient in warmed room (28 °C) and remove wet clothing. Cover with blankets and
other insulating materials. Give warm drinks and encourage active movement. Aim for rise of
0.5 °C/h.
Active external
rewarming (HT II)
Apply forced external heat (e.g. Bair Hugger). Aim for rise of 2.0 °C/h (beware hypotension).
Active internal
rewarming (HT II-III)
Give heated IV fluids (40–42 °C), apply warmed and humidified O2 via facemask. Focus on
torso first.
Extracorporeal
rewarming (HT IV)
Peritoneal or haemodialysis, arteriovenous rewarming, cardiopulmonary bypass, extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO).

<!-- page:82 -->
Hypothermia
63
Table 9.3  Urgent investigation in hypothermia.
Investigations and
monitoring
Comment
Continuous monitoring
ECG (Figure 9.2)
Prolongation of PR, QRS, QT intervals, ST-elevation, T-wave inversion, Osborn J wave,
atrial fibrillation or sinus bradycardia. Supraventricular arrhythmias usually resolve once
core temperature returns to normal. Ventricular fibrillation may occur at core
temperatures <30 °C and can be refractory to shock.
Arterial oxygenation
Hypothermia reduces the oxygen demand of the body (6–7% per 1 °C cooling) to
protect vital organs from hypoxic damage. Beware that pulse oximeters placed on
fingers can be slow.
Check every hour
Vital signs
Temperature, respiratory rate, level of consciousness
Blood pressure, urine output
and central venous pressure
Most hypothermic patients are volume-depleted and will need monitoring for adequate
fluid therapy.
Check every 4 h
Blood glucose
Raised levels (10–20 mmol/L) should not be treated with insulin because of the risk of
hypoglycaemia on rewarming.
Full blood cell count
White blood cells and platelets may be reduced due to splenic sequestration
Electrolytes, creatinine and
creatinine kinase
Renal failure due to hypovolaemia/hypotension and rhabdomyolysis
Arterial blood gases and
lactate
Severe hypothermia results in metabolic acidosis
Lipase
Can be increased due to hypothermia-induced pancreatitis
Re-assess if necessary
CRP, blood and urine cultures,
thyroid function, toxicology
screen
To rule out other causes of hypothermia (e.g. infection and substance abuse)
Chest radiograph
Pulmonary oedema, vascular congestion or aspiration pneumonia. Pneumonia is
a common cause and complication of hypothermia: give antibiotics once
cultures have been taken. Further doses need not be given until the core
temperature is >32 °C.
X-pelvis and hips
If history of fall or clinical signs of femur fractures

<!-- page:83 -->
64
Acute Medicine
Core temperature <35 °C
Vital signs
present?
Start CPRb
HOPEc ≥ 10
ICEd < 12
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No ROSC
Yesa
AER/AIR
PER
a) cardiocirculatory instability with a core temperature ≤32 °C
b) unless obvious cause of irreversible death
c) Hypothermia Outcome Prediction after ECLS
d) ICE Survival Score
e) consider if serum K>12 mmol/L or patient rewarmed to >32 °C with
on-going asystole and no other causes of reversible caridac arrest
ECLS
Stop CPR?e
History, examination and investigations
Identify and treat associated illnesses
Supportive (post-resuscitation) care
Impaired
consciousness?
Figure 9.1  Management accidental hypothermia – figure adapted from the European Resuscitation Council
Guidelines 2021: Cardiac arrest in special circumstances. CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; PER, passive external
rewarming; AER, active external rewarming; AIR, active internal rewarming; ECLS, extracorporeal life support.
Figure 9.2  ECG in hypothermia (core temperature 30 °C) showing bradycardia, prolongation of ECG intervals, and
elevation of the J point in the chest leads giving a J or Osborne wave.

<!-- page:84 -->
Hypothermia
65
Further reading
Duong H, Patel G. (2024) Hypothermia. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing.
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545239/.
European Resuscitation Council Guidelines (2021) RC guidelines. https://cprguidelines.eu/.
Zafren K, Crawford MC. (2024) Accidental hypothermia in adults. In: UpToDate, Connor RF (Ed). Wolters
Kluwer.
