# CHAPTER 12 Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)

- Pages: 97-107
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:97 -->
78
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) represent a spectrum of conditions characterised by a sudden reduction in
blood flow to the myocardium, leading to myocardial ischemia. This includes ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI), non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and unstable angina (UA). The
underlying pathophysiology usually involves the disruption of atherosclerotic plaques within the coronary
arteries, often due to rupture or erosion, resulting in partial or complete occlusion of the vessel.
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
STEMI is characterised by a complete occlusion of a coronary artery, leading to significant myocardial injury.
The diagnosis is primarily based on the presence of new ST-segment elevations on the electrocardiogram
(ECG) and raised troponin. STEMI requires immediate reperfusion therapy to restore blood flow and minimise
myocardial damage. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is a rare cause of STEMI, more common
in young to middle-aged women and in pregnancy.
NSTEMI and unstable angina
NSTEMI and UA share similar pathophysiological mechanisms, typically involving partial occlusion of a coronary
artery. NSTEMI and UA present similarly with a history and possible ECG changes suspicious of cardiac ischaemia, but without persistent ST-segment elevation on the ECG. NSTEMI also has evidence of myocardial injury
indicated by a raised troponin, where in UA troponin is normal. UA is characterised by worsening chest pain at
rest or with minimal exertion, indicating increased risk for myocardial infarction.
The widespread use of high-sensitivity troponins has made the diagnosis of UA increasingly rare, with very
few cases of clinical and ECG evidence of myocardial ischaemia without a raised troponin.
Differentials for ACS
Differentiating ACS from other causes of chest pain is critical for appropriate management. Conditions that
mimic ACS include (by no means an exhaustive list):
•	 Pulmonary Embolism: Sudden onset dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain and hypoxia.
•	 Aortic Dissection: Severe, tearing chest or back pain, often with pulse deficits or differences in blood
pressure between limbs.
•	 Pneumothorax: Sudden onset of sharp chest pain and shortness of breath.
•	 Takotsubo cardiomyopathy: Stress-induced cardiomyopathy with symptoms and ECG changes that can
resemble ACS.
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
William Fowkes and Jamie Kitt
CHAPTER 12

<!-- page:98 -->
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
79
•	 Pericarditis: Sharp, pleuritic chest pain that may improve with sitting up and leaning forward.
•	 Gastro-oesophageal Reflux Disease (GORD): Burning chest pain, often after meals, improving with
antacids.
•	 Pancreatitis: Epigastric pain radiating to the back, often after eating or drinking.
•	 Musculoskeletal Pain: Chest pain related to movement or palpation of the chest wall.
ACS management
Initial assessment, investigations and stabilisation
Upon presentation, the initial assessment of patients suspected of having ACS includes a focused history,
physical examination and rapid initiation of diagnostic tests. It is important to identify patients who require
immediate reperfusion therapy, i.e. percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or thrombolysis. Diagnosis is
made on a combination of history, ECG and troponins. Key steps include:
1	 History and Physical Examination:
•	 Assess the nature, onset, duration and intensity of chest pain:
•	 Site
•	 Severity
•	 Time of onset and duration
•	 Character (e.g. ‘stabbing’, ‘tight/gripping’ or ‘dull/aching’)
•	 Radiation (e.g. to arms, neck, jaw and back)
•	 Precipitating and relieving factors (e.g. exertion/rest/GTN spray)
•	 Previous episodes of similar pain, particularly on exertion
•	 Associated symptoms
•	 Breathlessness, nausea and vomiting, sweating, palpitations, dizziness and loss of consciousness
•	 Identify risk factors such as older age, male sex, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, smoking, renal
disease and family history of coronary artery disease. New female-specific risk factors include history of
pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, preterm birth, use of HRT and premature ovarian insufficiency.
2	 Electrocardiogram (ECG):
•	 Look for ST-segment elevation or depression, T-wave inversions, or new left bundle branch block. The
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2023 guideline includes an update on the finding of LBBB. ECG
changes are discussed in further detail below.
3	 Cardiac Biomarkers:
•	 High-sensitivity troponin is now universally used as the standard biomarker of myocardial injury.
•	 Different units will have different troponin assays and local guidelines should be used to determine timing
and interpretation of levels.
4	 Echocardiography:
•	 Bedside echocardiography (ECHO) is particularly useful in suspected ACS patients presenting with shock.
•	 In shocked patients: ECHO helps assess left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) function and
detect large pericardial effusions, which can guide immediate management. It also allows evaluation for
LV thrombus, LV free wall rupture +/− ventricular septal rupture, particularly relevant in late presenting
infarcts.
•	 Regional Wall Motion Abnormalities (RMWAs): ECHO can identify RMWAs that support a diagnosis
of ACS, particularly if they correspond to the same territory as ECG changes.
•	 Formal departmental ECHO should be performed in all patients while an inpatient to accurately assess
LV function and identify any valvular disease, especially in patients who are considered for revascularisation. This also helps guide driving advice as per DVLA guidance.

<!-- page:99 -->
80
Acute Medicine
5	 Chest X-ray
•	 Chest X-ray to assess for other causes of chest pain (e.g. aortic dissection, pneumothorax and pneumonia),
as well as for evidence of pulmonary oedema.
6	 Other bloods
•	 Glucose and HbA1c – aim to keep glucose <11.
•	 U&Es and LFTs – replace potassium and magnesium if deficient.
•	 Lipid profile including triglyceride levels.
ECG changes in STEMI
STEMI:
STEMI diagnostic criteria: New ST-segment elevation at the J-point
in two contiguous leads with the cut-off points: ≥1 mm in all leads
other than V2-V3. For leads V2-V3 the following cut-off points
apply: ≥2 mm in males ≥40 years, ≥2.5 mm in males <40 years,
or ≥ 1.5 mm in females.
J point
LBBB:
The ESC 2023 guideline no longer classifies new or presumably
new left bundle branch block (LBBB) as a STEMI equivalent
warranting planned emergent reperfusion therapy. This represents
an evolving paradigm, moving away from the previous approach
that considered LBBB a STEMI equivalent.
Posterior MI:
Take care not to miss a posterior MI. With chest pain and ST
depression in V1-3 +/− dominant R wave in I consider posterior
leads (V7-9) to assess for posterior ST elevation.
VI-V3
RV infarction:
RV infarction may accompany an inferior STEMI.
In inferior STEMI, additional ST elevation in V1 suggests RV
infarction. If this is the case, place V4 in a reflected position on the
right side of the chest (fifth right intercostal space, mid-clavicular
line) to assess for ST elevation.
RV infarction is clinically significant since the use of nitrates can
precipitate severe hypotension due to preload sensitivity.
Hypotension in RV infarction is treated with careful fluid
resuscitation to ensure adequate filling pressure.
V7-V9, V3R and V4R

<!-- page:100 -->
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
81
Changes in NSTEMI:
ST-segment depression:
Horizontal or down-sloping ST depression ≥0.5 mm in two or more
contiguous leads.
≥I leads
T-wave inversion:
Symmetrical T-wave inversion ≥1 mm in two contiguous leads with
prominent R waves or R/S ratio > 1.
I, II, aVL, or V2–V6
Wellen’s syndrome:
Wellen’s syndrome is characterised by biphasic (Type A) or deeply
inverted (Type B) T waves in leads V2-V3. It is an indicator of
significant stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD)
artery and carries a high risk of anterior wall myocardial infarction.
The ECGs often evolve quickly from V1-V6 so serial ECGs are vitally
important.
Type A
Type B
(VI-)V2-V3(-V4)
(VI-)V2-V3(-V4)
De Winter’s sign:
De Winter’s sign is an alternative presentation of anterior STEMI.
It is characterised by upsloping ST depression >1 mm at the J-point
in the precordial leads (V1-V6) along with tall, symmetrical T waves.
This pattern signifies a critical occlusion of the LAD artery and
requires immediate intervention.
VI–V6
Source: Adapted from ESC Guidelines for the Management of Acute Coronary Syndromes (2023).

<!-- page:101 -->
82
Acute Medicine
ECG leads
Location of MI
V1-3
Anteroseptal
V2-4
Anterior
I, aVL, V5-6
Lateral
II, III, aVF
Inferior
V1, V4R
Right Ventricle (RV)
V7-9 (with ST depression in V1-3)
Posterior
Initial Stabilisation:
•	 Oxygen: should be administered to patients with oxygen saturation below 90%. Routine use of oxygen in
patients with normal oxygen saturation is no longer recommended as it has not been shown to improve
outcomes.
•	 Sublingual GTN: for chest pain relief, unless contraindicated.
•	 To be used with caution with evidence of RV infarction, hypotension or known severe aortic stenosis
•	 Consider GTN infusion if ongoing chest pain, monitoring BP (local protocol will guide on BP but often
aiming for systolic >90 mmHg)
•	 Discuss with cardiology if ongoing chest pain requiring GTN infusion, as these patients may require urgent
angiography
•	 IV opioid: titrate dose according to pain, with antiemetic if needed
•	 In haemodynamic instability: discuss with intensive care for consideration of inotropic support
•	 There are multiple causes of cardiogenic shock in ACS, which can be identified with bedside echo
•	 Acute LV or RV failure
•	 Papillary muscle rupture with acute severe mitral regurgitation
•	 LV wall rupture – either interventricular, or free wall rupture
Percutaneous coronary intervention
PCI is a cornerstone of ACS management, with the timing of PCI depending on the severity of the patient’s
condition (Table 12.1). Drug-eluting stents are recommended in all cases, and coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) should be considered where PCI is not feasible or unsuccessful.
Table 12.1  Timing of PCI.
Risk level
Criteria
Timing of PCI
STEMI
Immediate or within 2 h of admission.
‘Time is myocardium’
Very high risk
NSTEMI
•	 Haemodynamic instability or cardiogenic shock.
•	 Recurrent or ongoing chest pain refractory to
medical treatment.
•	 Acute heart failure presumed secondary to
ongoing myocardial ischaemia.
•	 Life-threatening arrhythmias or cardiac arrest
after presentation.
•	 Mechanical complications of MI.
•	 Recurrent dynamic ECG changes suggestive of
ischaemia.
Immediate or within 2 h of admission.

<!-- page:102 -->
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
83
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
Primary PCI (PPCI)
The preferred method of reperfusion in STEMI is if it can be performed within 120 min of first medical contact.
Cardiology should be contacted as soon as the diagnosis of STEMI is made.
Thrombolysis
Thrombolysis is indicated if anticipated time from diagnosis of STEMI to PCI exceeds 120 min – more likely in
remote centres with a longer transfer time to the nearest PCI centre. Administer thrombolytic therapy as soon
as possible, within 12 h of symptom onset. Follow local guidelines for thrombolysis protocol. If not easily accessible, the BNF has thrombolysis protocols for thrombolytics such as alteplase.
Post-thrombolysis care:
•	 All patients should be transferred to a PCI centre after initiation of thrombolysis
•	 Rescue PCI is indicated for failed thrombolysis:
•	 ST-segment resolution <50% within 60–90 min of thrombolytic administration
•	 Haemodynamic instability
•	 Arrhythmias
•	 Worsening ischaemia or persistent chest pain
•	 Otherwise, early routine PCI should be performed (within 2–24 h)
Follow local guidance or cardiology advice on antiplatelet therapy to be given in addition to thrombolysis –
typically aspirin and clopidogrel.
NSTEMI
The management of NSTEMI involves risk stratification to guide the timing of PCI, and whether the patient
should proceed to invasive angiography and PCI.
GRACE 3.0 score (predicts in-hospital, 6-month and 3-yearly mortality in ACS):
Age
Heart rate
Systolic BP
Creatinine
Sex
Cardiac arrest at admission
ST segment deviation
Raised troponin
Killip class
Source: Adapted from https://www.grace-3.com/about.
Risk level
Criteria
Timing of PCI
High risk NSTEMI
•	 Confirmed diagnosis of NSTEMI based on ESC
troponin algorithms.
•	 GRACE risk score > 140.
•	 Transient ST-segment elevation.
•	 Dynamic ST-segment or T wave changes.
Within 24 h of presentation.
No high or very
high risk features
•	 Management based on degree of suspicion for
ACS, for discussion with local cardiology team.
To discuss with cardiology team.
Source: Adapted from ESC Guidelines for the Management of Acute Coronary Syndromes (2023).
Table 12.1  (Continued )

<!-- page:103 -->
84
Acute Medicine
Myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries
Myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA) refers to a condition where patients
exhibit symptoms suggestive of ACS, elevated troponin levels, but have less than 50% coronary artery stenosis
in major coronary arteries during angiography. It is a broad term encompassing various coronary and noncoronary causes, and serves as a provisional diagnosis requiring further investigation to identify the underlying
cause. Definitive diagnosis typically involves further investigations, including specialist invasive imaging and
cardiac MRI, which can diagnose the cause of the majority of cases.
Anti-thrombotics
Antiplatelets
•	 Administer aspirin (300 mg loading dose) immediately to all patients with suspected ACS unless
contraindicated.
•	 Consider second antiplatelet with a P2Y12  inhibitor (clopidogrel, ticagrelor or prasugrel), according to
bleeding risk and local guidelines. The second antiplatelet should be given before or at the time of PCI.
•	 Bleeding risk can be assessed with scores such as the Academic Research Consortium on High Bleeding Risk
(ARC-HBR) – presence of one major or two minor risk factors indicates high bleeding risk.
•	 If the patient is already on antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy prior to admission, discuss with cardiology
to determine the preferred treatment regimen going forward.
Anticoagulation
•	 Initiate anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) in patients
with ACS.
•	 The choice of anticoagulant and duration of therapy depend on the clinical scenario and timing of invasive
procedures, as well as local guidelines.
Gastric protection
For patients on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) should be considered in those
with a high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. ESC guidance suggests prescribing a PPI if one of the following
is present:
•	 History of gastrointestinal bleeding or
•	 Concurrent use of anticoagulants, NSAIDs or steroids or
•	 Presence of two or more of the following factors:
1	 Age > 65 years
2	 Dyspepsia
3	 Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
4	 Helicobacter pylori infection
5	 Chronic alcohol use
Complications in ACS
Arrhythmias:
•	 Tachyarrhythmias:
•	 Atrial Fibrillation (AF): Manage as usual with rate/rhythm control and anticoagulation. If unstable follow
ALS guidance. If long-term anticoagulation is started this should be considered when deciding on
antiplatelet therapy for ACS.

<!-- page:104 -->
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
85
•	 Ventricular Fibrillation and Ventricular Tachycardia:
•	 Treat as per ALS tachyarrhythmia guideline.
•	 Incidence has significantly reduced with the advent of emergency reperfusion.
•	 Consider secondary prevention with an Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD), especially if the
arrhythmia occurs >48 h post reperfusion.
•	 Bradyarrhythmias:
•	 Treat as per ALS bradyarrhythmia guideline.
•	 High-Degree AV Block: A permanent pacemaker (PPM) should be considered after at least five days
post  reperfusion. Occasionally a pacemaker is inserted before this with particularly unstable
bradyarrhythmias.
Heart failure and cardiogenic shock:
•	 Heart failure and cardiogenic shock are severe complications of ACS that require urgent management. The
main causes of this in ACS are LV or RV failure secondary to infarction, or mechanical complications
(see below).
•	 Diuretics, vasodilators, inotropes +/− vasopressors may be required, as directed by the cardiology and intensive care teams.
•	 Mechanical circulatory support should be considered by the appropriate expert teams.
•	 Mechanical complications:
•	 All mechanical complications are potentially life-threatening.
•	 These include left ventricular free wall rupture (and subsequent pericardial effusion and tamponade),
interventricular septal rupture with resulting left to right shunt, and acute severe mitral regurgitation
secondary to papillary muscle rupture.
•	 These typically present with sudden hypotension and cardiogenic shock, a recurrence of chest pain,
and/or a new murmur.
•	 They can either be a presenting feature of ACS (particularly in those who present late) or may develop
during admission.
•	 Immediate echocardiography is required to identify the complications, and emergency surgery/
percutaneous structural intervention is often required. An MDT approach is paramount in managing such
complications.
LV thrombus:
•	 More likely to develop with large anterior infarcts.
•	 All patients should have an ECHO during admission. If visualisation of the left ventricular apex is inconclusive
then a contrast ECHO or cardiac MRI should be considered.
•	 Treatment is with anticoagulation for 3–6 months with possible reimaging to ensure resolution of thrombus,
as guided by the cardiology team.
Pericarditis:
•	 Pericarditis can occur following myocardial infarction and should be managed with anti-inflammatory medications. Pericarditis typically presents with pleuritic chest pain, pericardial friction rub, and diffuse ST-segment
elevation on ECG. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and colchicine are commonly used for
treatment. Oral steroids can also be used as third line treatment.
Complications post PCI
1	 Vascular complications:
•	 Vascular complications at the site of access can occur in the minutes-to-days post procedure. These
include bleeding and haematoma formation and are usually self-limiting.
•	 Pseudoaneurysm presents as a pulsatile mass at/near the site of access and may require ultrasound-guided
compression, thrombin injection or rarely vascular surgical repair (usually from femoral access).

<!-- page:105 -->
86
Acute Medicine
2	 Stent thrombosis
•	 Formation of thrombus within the stent, partially or fully obstructing blood flow.
•	 This typically occurs within the first 30 days following stent insertion, presenting with chest pain and
ischaemic ECG changes.
•	 Patients who are non-compliant with antiplatelets are particularly at risk.
3	 In-stent restenosis:
•	 Regrowth of the vessel around and within the stent causing narrowing of the lumen and reducing blood
flow. This typically presents later than stent thrombosis, around 6–12 months after stent insertion. Treat
as per ACS.
Long-term management
Cardiac rehabilitation
Participation in a structured cardiac rehabilitation program is essential for recovery and secondary prevention.
These programs include exercise training, education on heart-healthy living, and counselling to reduce stress.
Cardiac rehabilitation has been shown to improve functional capacity, quality of life and reduce the risk of
recurrent cardiac events.
Lifestyle modifications (as per NICE guidelines)
Smoking cessation
Advise to stop smoking, and offer assistance from a smoking cessation service. If unable/unwilling to accept
referral then offer pharmacotherapy in line with NICE guidance (including transdermal patches, gum, inhalation
cartridges, tablets, lozenges, mouth spray and nasal spray).
Dietary recommendations
Emphasise a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins and low in saturated fats, trans fats,
cholesterol, salt and added sugars. NICE and BHF guidance advocates a Mediterranean-style diet.
Physical exercise
Encourage regular aerobic exercise (e.g. walking, cycling and swimming) tailored to the patient’s capacity and
cardiovascular risk. About 30 min a day to the point of slight breathlessness is advised. People who are not active
to this level should increase their activity in a gradual, step-by-step way, to increase their exercise capacity.
Weight management
Aim for a healthy BMI through diet and exercise. Offer advice to those who are overweight and obese.
Alcohol consumption
Advise moderation and adherence to recommended limits.
Medical therapy
1	 Antiplatelets and anticoagulation:
•	 Continue DAPT for 6–12 months post-PCI, after which aspirin monotherapy should be continued
lifelong.

<!-- page:106 -->
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
87
•	 Strategies to reduce bleeding risk in high bleeding risk patients include reducing duration of DAPT to
3–6 months or de-escalation from prasugrel/ticagrelor to clopidogrel after 30 days; however, evidence is
limited in higher-risk ACS patients.
2	 Secondary prevention lipid management:
•	 Aggressive lipid-lowering therapy, typically with high-intensity statins, should be initiated to achieve target lipid levels and reduce the risk of recurrent events.
•	 Lipid management, including target cholesterol levels and emerging treatments, are changing frequently.
Therefore, the most up-to-date guidelines should be consulted on secondary prevention lipid
management.
•	 If a patient already on maximum statin dose has not achieved the target level, second-line medications
such as ezetimibe can be added, with consideration of referral to lipid clinic.
•	 ESC (2023) guidance recommends:
1	 LDL < 1.4 mmol/L and achieve a ≥ 50% LDL reduction from baseline.
2	 If LDL goal is not achieved in 4–6 weeks, consider adding in ezetimibe.
3	 If LDL goal is still not achieved in a further 4–6 weeks, consider adding in PCSK9 inhibitor.
3	 Heart failure management – patients with LVEF < 40%
•	 Patients with Heart Failure with reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF) should aim to be started on the four
pillars of medical management of heart failure:
1	 ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) – also recommended in patients with diabetes,
hypertension or CKD.
2	 Beta-blockers.
3	 Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone and eplerenone).
4	 SGLT-2 inhibitors (empagliflozin and dapagliflozin).
•	 The patient should be referred to the local heart failure team, who can advise on initiation of medical
therapy and titrate medications in the community following discharge.
•	 These patients should have repeat echocardiography in 6–12 weeks after revascularisation and on optimal
medical therapy, to assess recovery.
•	 Consideration for ICD placement is based on persistent left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF < 35%) after
3 months of optimal medical therapy.
4	 Diabetes management
•	 Aim for a target HbA1c of less than 53 mmol/mol (7.0%).
•	 The choice of anti-hyperglycaemic agents should be personalised based on the patient’s comorbidities
and preferences.
5	 Hypertension management
•	 Aim for a target blood pressure (BP) of less than 130/80 mmHg if tolerated.
•	 For patients over 70 years old, aim for a target BP of less than 140/90 mmHg, but ideally 130/80 mmHg.
6	 Vaccination:
•	 All ACS patients should be offered annual influenza vaccination.
Management of bystander disease
Complete revascularisation of bystander disease is now recommended either during the index PCI or within
45 days to reduce the risk of future cardiac events. This approach aims to ensure all significant coronary lesions
are addressed, thereby improving long-term outcomes. The decision between staged PCI or CABG should be
made by an MDT involving cardiologists and cardiac surgeons. DAPT is stopped pre-operatively and a
single agent continued to undergo CABG. DAPT should be resumed following surgery and continued for
at least 12 months.

<!-- page:107 -->
88
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Byrne RA, Rossello X, Coughlan JJ, Barbato E, Berry C, Chieffo A, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the
management of acute coronary syndromes: developed by the task force on the management of acute
coronary syndromes of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2023;44(38):3720–3826.
10.1093/eurheartj/ehad191.
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) (2024) Assessing fitness to drive: a guide for medical professionals.
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) Last updated: February 2024. https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/assessing-fitness-to-drive-guide-for-medical-professionals.
Maas AH, Rosano G, Cifkova R, Chieffo A, van Dijken D, Hamoda H, et al. Cardiovascular health after
menopause transition, pregnancy disorders, and other gynaecologic conditions: a consensus document
from European cardiologists, gynaecologists, and endocrinologists. Eur Heart J 2021;42(10):967–984.
10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1044.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Acute Coronary Syndromes: NICE Guideline
[NG185]. London: NICE; 2020. Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng185.
Soar J, Deakin CD, Nolan JP, et al. (2021) Adult advanced life support guidelines. Resuscitation Council UK.
https://www.resus.org.uk/library/2021-resuscitation-guidelines/adult-advanced-life-support-guidelines.
Yndigegn T, Lindahl B, Mars K, Alfredsson J, Benatar J, Brandin L, et al. Beta-blockers after myocardial
infarction and preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2024;390(15):1372–1381. 10.1056/
NEJMoa2401479.
