# CHAPTER 16 Acute pericarditis

- Pages: 144-147
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:144 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
125
•	 Consider acute pericarditis in the patient with pleuritic central chest pain. Pericarditis accounts for 5% of
patients with acute severe chest pain.
•	 The typical patient is an otherwise healthy young adult, with a presumed viral (‘idiopathic’) aetiology (male:
female ratio 2 : 1). Viral pericarditis may be preceded by a flu-like illness and is usually a self-limiting disorder
lasting one to three weeks.
•	 Other causes are given in Table 16.1.
•	 There is a recurrence rate after a first episode of pericarditis of 15–30%, substantially reduced by treatment
with colchicine.
•	 Patients with mild disease can be safely managed without hospitalisation.
•	 The management of the patient with suspected acute pericarditis is summarised in Figure 16.1.
Priorities
1	 Review the observations and make a focused clinical assessment (Table 16.2). A pericardial friction rub is
heard in less than one-third of cases, so its absence does not exclude the diagnosis.
2	 If there are clinical signs of cardiac tamponade (breathlessness with distended neck veins or pulsus paradoxus; see Chapter 6) arrange urgent echocardiography and seek urgent advice from a cardiologist.
Acute pericarditis
David Sprigings and Ruth Lithgow
CHAPTER 16
Table 16.1  Causes of acute pericarditis.
Infectious (80–85% of cases)
Viruses: e.g. enteroviruses, especially coxsackie and echoviruses; adenoviruses; parvovirus B19; herpes viruses
(especially EBV and CMV); HIV; SARS-CoV-2
Pyogenic bacteria: e.g. Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, S. aureus, Neisseria meningitidis
Other bacteria: e.g. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Coxiella burnetii (Q fever agent), Borrelia burgdorferi
(Lyme disease agent)
Non-infectious (15–20% cases)
Post-cardiac injury syndrome: e.g. after cardiac surgery, cardiac device implantation, percutaneous cardiac procedure,
chest trauma
Autoimmune: e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis
Neoplastic: e.g. breast or lung cancer, lymphoma
Metabolic: e.g. uraemia, hypothyroidism
Drug-related: e.g. chemotherapeutic agents, drugs causing lupus-like syndrome, vaccines including mRNA COVID vaccine

<!-- page:145 -->
126
Acute Medicine
Table 16.2  Focused clinical assessment in suspected acute pericarditis.
History
Quality of chest pain? The pain of acute pericarditis is typically worse on inspiration and in certain postures, for example
lying back, and is relieved by sitting up or leaning forward.
Was there a viral prodrome (fever, malaise, sore throat, muscle aching)?
Are there any constitutional symptoms to suggest TB (weight loss, chronic cough) or underlying autoimmune disease?
History of predisposing conditions?
Risk for post-cardiac injury syndrome pericarditis: cardiac surgery, procedure or chest trauma, two to four weeks
previously (range one week to three months)?
Examination
Patient ill or well?
Temperature
Signs of tamponade (breathlessness, distended neck veins, palpable pulsus paradoxus, hypotension)?
Signs of heart failure (basal lung crackles) to suggest myocarditis with ventricular dysfunction?
Pericardial friction rub?
Suspected acute pericarditis
• Central chest pain, worse on inspiration and/or
• Pericardial friction rub
Causes: Table 16.1
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Oxygen, ECG monitor, IV access if signs of critical illness
Relieve pain with morphine IV
Focused assessment (Table 16.2)
12-lead ECG echocardiography and other urgent
investigation (Table 16.3)
Signs of cardiac tamponade?
• Breathlessness
• Low BP and/or pulsus
   paradoxus
• Distended neck veins
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Immediate echocardiography
See Chapter 6 for
management of cardiac
tamponade
No
Purulent pericarditis possible?
• Ill patient with fever >38°C
• Known intrathoracic infection
   or bacteremia
Take blood cultures
Start antibiotic therapy
Urgent echocardiography
Discuss with cardiologist/
cardiac surgeon
No
Recent cardiac intervention?
Consider postcardiotomy
syndrome
Discuss with cardiologist/
cardiac surgeon
No
Other high risk features?
• Signs of myopericarditis
• Cancer
• Immunosuppression
Discuss with cardiologist
No
Probable viral/idiopathic pericarditis
Figure 16.1  Management of the patient with suspected acute pericarditis.

<!-- page:146 -->
Acute pericarditis
127
3	 Obtain an electrocardiogram (ECG) and other investigations (Table 16.3). The diagnosis of acute pericarditis
is based on the clinical features supported by the ECG and requires at least two of the following four
features:
•	 Pericarditic chest pain: central chest pain worse on inspiration and eased by sitting forward
•	 Pericardial friction rub
•	 New widespread ST-segment elevation and/or PR depression on ECG
•	 Pericardial effusion on echocardiography (new or worsening; present in 50–65% of patients).
The distinction between acute pericarditis, acute coronary syndrome with ST-segment elevation and nonspecific chest pain with benign early repolarization can sometimes be difficult (Chapter 12).
4	 Decide on the likely aetiology and risk-stratify the patient (Table 16.4).
Further management
1	 In-patient or out-patient management?
Admit if there are high-risk features (Table 16.4) or a non-viral cause of pericarditis requiring specific treatment is suspected.
Patients with presumed viral (‘idiopathic’) or post-cardiac injury syndrome pericarditis, who have no highrisk features, can be managed without hospitalisation. Give an NSAID with gastroprotection, plus colchicine
(Table 16.5). NSAID should be continued for one week after pain resolves, then tapered off, and colchicine
given for three months. Arrange clinic review in one to two weeks and provide advice on how to obtain
Table 16.3  Investigation in suspected acute pericarditis.
ECG
Chest X-ray (usually normal unless a large pericardial effusion (>300 mL) is present)
Echocardiography (urgent if evidence of tamponade or myocarditis)
Plasma troponin
Renal function and electrolytes
Full blood count
C-reactive protein
ESR
Blood culture (if suspected bacterial infection)
Autoantibody screen
HIV serology
BNP or NT-proBNP
Table 16.4  High-risk features in acute pericarditis.
Ill patient
Fever >38 °C
Sub-acute course
Large pericardial effusion (>20 mm thick on echocardiography)
Clinical or echocardiographic features of cardiac tamponade (Chapter 6)
Immunosuppression
Evidence of myopericarditis (elevated plasma troponin/BNP, ventricular dysfunction on echocardiography)
Oral anticoagulation
Immunosuppression
Pericarditis in the context of chest trauma

<!-- page:147 -->
128
Acute Medicine
medical help if there is worsening pain or the development of breathlessness. Patients should avoid exercise
until symptoms have fully resolved, and competitive sports for three months (six months if there is myopericarditis, with raised plasma troponin and/or ventricular dysfunction on echocardiography).
2	 Purulent pericarditis
This is rare and is usually due to the spread of intrathoracic infection, for example following thoracic trauma
or complicating bacterial pneumonia. Consider if the patient is ill with fever >38 °C or is known to have
intrathoracic infection or bacteraemia.
Take blood cultures and start antibiotic therapy (e.g. IV vancomycin and ceftriaxone). Seek urgent advice
from a microbiologist.
Perform pericardiocentesis if there is an effusion large enough to drain safely (thickness > 20 mm) and
send the fluid for Gram stain and culture. Consider tuberculosis or fungal infection if the effusion is purulent
but no organisms are seen on Gram stain.
Discuss further management with a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon.
3	 Post-cardiac injury syndrome pericarditis
This is an acute self-limiting illness, with fever, pericarditis and pleuritis. Consider if the patient with
acute pericarditis has had cardiac surgery, a cardiac procedure or chest trauma two to four weeks previously (range one week to three months). The ECG may show typical changes of acute pericarditis or only
non-specific ST/T abnormalities. The chest X-ray may show an enlarged cardiac silhouette (due to pericardial effusion), bilateral pleural effusions and transient pulmonary infiltrates. The ESR is typically
around 100 mm/h.
The differential diagnosis includes infectious or neoplastic pleuro-pericarditis, pulmonary embolism and
oesophageal rupture.
Treat with NSAID plus colchicine as for acute viral pericarditis (Table 16.5).
Further reading
Chiabrando JG, Bonaventura A, Vecchie A, et al. (2020) Management of acute and recurrent pericarditis. J
Am Coll Cardiol 75, 76–92.
Lazarou E, Tsioufis P, Vlachopoulos C, et al. (2022) Acute pericarditis: update. Curr Cardiol Rep 24, 905–913.
Table 16.5  Treatment of acute pericarditis.
Drug
Comment/Dose/Duration
NSAID
Ibuprofen 600–800 mg 8-hourly PO or
Aspirin 750–1000 mg 8-hourly PO
(aspirin preferred in patients with coronary artery disease)
Continue for one week after pain resolves, then taper off.
Co-administer a proton-pump inhibitor for gastroprotection.
Prednisolone
If NSAID contraindicated or if there is evidence of auto-immune cause and infection has been excluded.
Give prednisolone 0.2–0.5 mg/kg/day PO.
Co-administer a proton-pump inhibitor for gastroprotection.
Colchicine
Co-administer with NSAID or prednisolone.
Age <70 and weight >70 kg:
Give colchicine 500 μgm twice daily PO
Age >70 or weight <70 kg:
Give colchicine 500 μgm once daily PO
Continue for three months.
