# CHAPTER 17 Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults

- Pages: 148-158
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:148 -->
129
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Priorities
•	 Cardiomyopathy is the underlying cause in approximately 15% of sudden cardiac deaths (SCDs)  (1).
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common type causing SCD in the United Kingdom.
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is also a frequent cause of SCD; serious arrhythmia can occur early
in the course of disease, without major electrocardiographic (ECG) or echocardiographic changes.
•	 Shock in the context of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is a medical emergency and
should warrant urgent specialist input. If left ventricular (LV) obstruction is echocardiographically confirmed,
treatment goals are to minimise outflow obstruction and avoid positive inotropes.
•	 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) can present as acute heart failure or cardiogenic shock. It is the most
common underlying reason for heart transplantation in the United Kingdom.
•	 Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is not a true cardiomyopathy (primary heart muscle disease); it can mimic the
presentation of a myocardial infarction but, with supportive care through the initial event, the long-term
prognosis can be very good and full recovery is common.
•	 Atrial arrhythmias are common in adult congenital heart disease (CHD) and should warrant urgent specialist
input, rehydration as required and early cardioversion.
Cardiomyopathies are disorders of the myocardium in which the heart muscle is structurally and functionally
abnormal, in the absence of other causes such as coronary artery disease, hypertension, valvular disease and
CHD. In 2007, The European Society of Cardiology released a revised classification for cardiomyopathies
(Figure  17.1) that is clinically oriented and is grouped according to ventricular morphology and function,
followed by sub-division into familial and non-familial forms (2). Classification into familial and non-familial
forms of cardiomyopathy is designed to support a framework for further investigations.
Familial forms occur in at least two family members (index case and a relative); whereas non-familial forms
occur only in the index case and not within family members. Familial cardiomyopathies are often, but not
always, monogenic in nature. It is useful to appreciate that LV dysfunction secondary to coronary ischaemia or
myocardial infarction, sometimes termed ‘ischaemic cardiomyopathy’, is not considered a true cardiomyopathy
as it is not a primary disorder of heart muscle. Channelopathies are primary electrical disorders and generally
distinct from cardiomyopathies.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HCM is defined as the presence of increased ventricular wall thickness or mass in the absence of loading
conditions (hypertension, valve disease) sufficient to cause the observed abnormality.
Cardiomyopathies and congenital
heart disease in adults
Jonathan J. H. Bray and Julian O. M. Ormerod
CHAPTER 17

<!-- page:149 -->
130
Acute Medicine
HCM is due to monogenic or polygenic gene changes, generally affecting proteins in the heart muscle units
(the sarcomere). The polygenic (‘sarcomere negative’) form of disease tends to present later in life – 5th–7th
decades – is associated with hypertension and obesity, and carries a more benign prognosis. The monogenic
(‘sarcomere positive’) form typically presents before the age of 40; commonly in the late teens/twenties, but
childhood presentation does occur and can be severe. The risk of SCD, atrial fibrillation (AF) and heart failure
(HF) is higher in the monogenic form of HCM. Clinical context, specific phenotype and genetic testing can
distinguish the two forms.
Similar phenotypes (‘phenocopies’) can be seen in metabolic disorders, mitochondrial disease or in association with congenital syndromes (e.g. Noonan or Williams syndromes). It is the most common cardiomyopathy
and occurs in approximately 1:500 of the general population (3, 4). Athletic training can lead to physiological
myocardial hypertrophy and can cause diagnostic uncertainty in some individuals. Careful phenotyping,
genetic testing and sometimes detraining can be helpful.
Signs and symptoms
•	 Exertional dyspnoea
•	 Fatigue
•	 Chest pain (anginal or atypical) – with normal coronary angiography.
•	 Presyncope and syncope (particularly exertional) – up to a quarter of patients report at least one episode and
almost half have presyncope.
•	 Palpitations
Symptoms of advanced heart failure are less common but can occur as part of ‘burnt-out HCM’. This is
progressive LV dysfunction and dilatation in HCM and has a poor prognosis. It more commonly occurs in
monogenic (‘sarcomere positive’) disease. Symptoms include orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea and
oedema.
Symptoms are caused by numerous mechanisms, including left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction,
myocardial dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, microvascular dysfunction or brady- or tachyarrhythmias. These
mechanisms vary between individuals and at different stages of disease progression.
The presence of atrial fibrillation is four to six-fold higher than in the general population and is again more
common in the monogenic form of the disease (5).
Cardiomyopathies
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
Dilated
cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic
right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
Restrictive
cardiomyopathy
Familial/Genetic
Non-familial/Non-genetic
Disease sub-type
Idiopathic
Disease sub-type
Unidentiﬁed
gene defect
Unclassiﬁed
Figure 17.1  European society of cardiology classification of cardiomyopathy. Source: Adapted from Elliott and
colleagues (2).

<!-- page:150 -->
Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults
131
Acute haemodynamic collapse can occur, manifesting with severe hypotension and symptoms of heart
failure, and a thready, double-impulse peripheral pulse and a systolic murmur of LV obstruction ± mitral
regurgitation on examination. Precipitating events include decreased preload (e.g. dehydration, diuretics and
acute blood loss), decreased afterload (e.g. perioperative vasodilation), supraventricular tachyarrhythmia,
or acute mitral regurgitation (e.g. endocarditis). LVOT obstruction should be confirmed by urgent echocardiography, and if present expert opinion should be sought. Treatment options are summarised in Table  17.1.
Conventional treatment for heart failure with nitrates, diuretics and vasodilators may exacerbate hemodynamic
impairment.
Investigations
•	 Blood tests: Troponin levels are often chronically raised in patients with established sarcomeric HCM and in
mitochondrial disease; acute rises in troponin may be caused by decompensation and do not necessarily
indicate ACS in this setting.
•	 Electrocardiogram: Most sensitive routine test.
•	 T wave inversion in anterolateral leads (strain pattern) due to abnormal repolarisation (can be deeply
inverted in apical HCM).
•	 Prominent Q waves in inferior and lateral leads due to hypertrophied septal depolarisation.
•	 P wave abnormalities from atrial enlargement.
•	 Left axis deviation from LV hypertrophy.
•	 Echocardiography: Identification of LV hypertrophy.
•	 ≥15 mm in any segment in an adult is considered pathological.
•	 Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve.
•	 LVOT obstruction.
•	 Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging can be useful, especially with suboptimal echocardiography;
it also can demonstrate fibrosis and distinguish phenocopies.
•	 Ambulatory ECG monitoring: As part of SCD risk stratification and for evaluation of symptoms.
•	 Exercise testing: Risk stratification (especially in younger adults).
•	 Genetic testing: Wider panel testing in the affected patient (proband) when a genetic condition is suspected
(diagnostic testing) or cascade family screening in at-risk individuals when a pathogenic (disease-causing)
gene change is known in the family (predictive testing).
•	 Cardiac catheterisation: Can be useful to exclude coronary disease or assess pulmonary pressures in selected
patients.
Table 17.1  Summary of the treatment of LVOT obstruction in HCM. IV: intravenous.
Minimise outflow
obstruction
Increase preload
•	 Elevation of the legs
•	 IV fluids/blood as necessary
•	 Correction of anaemia
Increase afterload
•	 Vasopressors (with minimal beta-1 agonist activity)
Negative inotropes
•	 Beta-blockers (e.g. IV metoprolol)
•	 IV disopyramide
•	 Role for myosin ATPase inhibitors (e.g. mavacamten) in
acute setting is unclear
Mechanical circulatory
support
•	 Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation can be considered
Septal reduction
•	 In certain situations, urgent surgical myectomy or alcohol
ablation
Treatments to avoid
•	 Positive inotropes, e.g. dobutamine, adrenaline

<!-- page:151 -->
132
Acute Medicine
Management
LV outflow tract obstruction (LVOT gradient >50 mmHg at rest or on Valsalva) in HOCM may be managed
conservatively if asymptomatic. If symptomatic, or in selected patients with high gradients (e.g. >100 mmHg
at rest), initial therapy involves titration of a non-vasodilating beta-blockade (e.g. bisoprolol, nadolol or
metoprolol) or a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (e.g. diltiazem or verapamil). Disopyramide is
a negative inotrope and class I antiarrhythmic, and can be added to either of these, or used (with caution) as
monotherapy. Cardiac myosin ATPase inhibitors (e.g. mavacamten) are relatively novel therapies that can be
used with severe obstructive symptoms, but drug interactions and a narrow therapeutic window necessitate
specialist prescribing and frequent monitoring. Short AV delay dual chamber pacing can be useful in selected
individuals, especially with concomitant bradyarrhythmia or need for an implantable cardiovert defibrillator
(ICD). Septal reduction therapy (either alcohol septal ablation or surgical myectomy) can be very effective for
ongoing symptoms despite optimal medical therapy.
In patients with HCM without LV obstruction or coronary artery disease, chest pain is treated, as above, with
a beta-blocker or a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. Treatment of arrhythmia and heart failure is
similar to patients without HCM.
ICDs are recommended for secondary prevention of sustained ventricular tachycardia and for certain patients
based on risk stratification for primary prevention. European guidelines recommend the use of a risk calculator
(HCM-RISK) to assist with risk stratification and inform discussion.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
DCM is defined as the presence of LV dilatation and LV systolic dysfunction in the absence of abnormal loading
conditions such as hypertension or valve disease, or coronary artery disease sufficient to cause global systolic
impairment. The right ventricle (RV) is not required to be dilated for diagnosis but may also be affected.
Chronic inflammatory cells may also be seen in histology or immunocytochemistry. Increasingly, it is recognised
that patients may present with dilatation alone, or with non-dilated LV dysfunction. A variety of terminology is
used (e.g. hypokinetic non-DCM).
Prevalence of DCM varies between populations (and with environmental factors such as alcohol use and
obesity), but it is thought that approximately one quarter have a familial form such as caused by mutations in
structural myocardial genes, including those associated with inherited muscular dystrophies (e.g. Becker and
Duchenne) (Table 17.2) (7). Other causes of DCM include nutritional deficiencies, endocrine dysfunction and
cardiomyopathy secondary to cardiotoxic drugs, though there are likely to be additional underlying genetic
predisposing factors that are incompletely understood. Inflammatory disease such as sarcoidosis may mimic
DCM and it can be challenging to distinguish DCM from chronic myocarditis.
Diagnosis of familial DCM
Familial DCM is diagnosed when idiopathic DCM is diagnosed in two or more family members; however,
it is important to be mindful that adult-onset DCM has a variable age of onset (‘age-related penetrance’).
•	 It is recommended to obtain a comprehensive (three-generation) family history.
•	 DCM secondary to syndromic disease can be familial, and so when examining it is important to examine for
subtle skeletal myopathy with proximal weakness of arms or legs.
•	 Certain genetic forms can present with early heart block.
•	 First-degree relatives of individuals with DCM should be considered for clinical screening.
Treatment
Treatment of DCM is similar to treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction as is covered in
Chapter 14.

<!-- page:152 -->
Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults
133
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Peripartum cardiomyopathy is diagnosed where signs of heart failure occur within the last month of pregnancy
or within five months following delivery. It is more common in women over 30 and is strongly associated
with gestational hypertension, pregnancy with twins and tocolytic therapy. Compared to the general DCM
population, a similar proportion have an identifiable causative gene change.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is characterised by a large rise in ventricular pressure with a minimal increase
in volume during ventricular diastole due to excess ventricular stiffness. European guidance has defined RCM
as restrictive ventricular physiology in the presence of a) normal or reduced diastolic volumes (of one or both
ventricles), b) normal or reduced systolic volumes and c) normal ventricular wall thickness. RCM is rare but
occurs most frequently due to systemic disorders such as amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, scleroderma and carcinoid
heart disease, and due to endomyocardial disorders causing fibrosis. Familial RCM can occur demonstrating
Table 17.2  Examples of causes and disease modifiers of cardiomyopathies.
Cause
Disease modifier
Phenotype
Genetic mutations
Lamin A/C (LMNA)
x
DCM
Titin (TTN)
x
x
DCM, (HCM)
Ribonucleic acid binding motif 20 (RBM20)
x
DCM
Myosin heavy chain 7 (MYH7)
x
DCM, HCM
Myosin-binding protein C (MYPC)
x
DCM, HCM
Troponin-T
x
DCM, HCM
Phospholamban (PLN)
x
DCM, HCM, ACM
Desmoplakin (DSP)
x
x
ACM, DCM, myocarditis
Sodium channel alpha unit 5 (SCN5a)
x
x
ACM, (DCM)
Tropomyosin-1
x
DCM
Haemochromatosis (HFE gene, C282Y)
x
HCM, DCM
Galactosidase-A (Fabry disease)
x
HCM
Neuromuscular disorders
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular
dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy
x
DCM
Syndromic disorders
Mitochondrial X-linked mutations
x
DCM
Acquired diseases
Infection (viruses)
x
x
Myocarditis, DCM
Immuno-mediated diseases (rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis)
x
x
Myocarditis, DCM
Toxic (alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine)
x
x
DCM, myocarditis
Drugs (anthracyclines, trastuzumab, immune
checkpoint inhibitors)
x
x
DCM, myocarditis
Overload (hemochromatosis)
x
x
HCM, DCM
Peripartum (pregnancy)
x
x
DCM
Comorbidities with possible gene mutations interactions and effect on phenotype
Tachy-arrhythmias
x
x
DCM
Diabetes mellitus
x
x
DCM, HCM
Hypertension
x
x
DCM, HCM
Hypo- and hyperthyroidism
x
DCM, HCM, myocarditis
Source: Adapted from McDonagh and colleagues (6).

<!-- page:153 -->
134
Acute Medicine
autosomal dominant inheritance with mutations to structural myocardial genes such as troponin I or as
autosomal recessive inheritance as part of metabolic disorders such as haemochromatosis or glycogen
storage disease.
Clinical features
Symptoms
•	 Slowly progressive signs and symptoms of heart failure, often over months (e.g. exertional dyspnoea, oedema).
•	 Reduced exercise tolerance.
•	 Palpitations or syncope from arrhythmias.
Signs
•	 Findings of chronic or decompensated HF (left-sided e.g. pulmonary oedema, S3 or right-sided sided,
e.g. raised jugular venous pressure (JVP), peripheral oedema, hepatomegaly.
•	 Pulses paradoxus: An exaggerated fall in blood pressure (>10 mmHg) upon inspiration.
•	 Kussmaul sign: A paradoxical rise in JVP on inspiration (more commonly seen in constrictive cardiomyopathy).
Investigations
•	 ECG: ECG abnormalities are common but non-specific. A reduced voltage ECG is common in TTR amyloidosis;
there may alternatively be evidence of LV hypertrophy.
•	 Echocardiography.
•	 Blood tests: To assess severity of disease (e.g. end-organ dysfunction) and potential secondary causes.
•	 Chest radiograph: Cardiomegaly due to atrial enlargement, pulmonary venous congestion, pleural effusions,
mediastinal lymphadenopathy in sarcoid, interstitial lung disease in scleroderma.
If initial investigation does not identify a probable cause, then further diagnostics such as CMR, nuclear
imaging, genetic testing and/or endomyocardial biopsy may be warranted.
Treatment
General principles of HF volume management apply including use of diuretics and treatment of arrhythmias
such as AF.
However, there is little evidence to support to use of other commonly used agents including reninangiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors, neprilysin inhibitors, beta-blockers and nitrates in the context of
decompensation. Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT-2i) are often used but evidence specifically
in RCM is lacking. Certain disease-specific therapies (e.g. tafamidis for TTR amyloidosis) may be available for
specialist use.
Advanced heart failure therapies including transplantation can be considered in patients with refractory
symptoms, depending on individual factors and overall prognosis.
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
In contrast to HCM, DCM and RCM, ACM is defined histologically with the presence of progressive replacement
of right ventricular myocardium with adipose and fibrous tissue. This may be confined to the right ventricle,
causing an ARVC phenotype, may be confined to the LV alone (‘left-dominant ACM’), or may affect both
ventricles. Ventricular arrhythmia can occur relatively early in the course of disease, and progressive heart
failure can occur later. ACM is rare, with a prevalence of around 1:2500 in the United Kingdom, although
there are areas of higher prevalence (e.g. northern Italy and The Netherlands) due to founder mutation effects.
The majority of cases are caused by autosomal dominantly inherited mutations in intercalated disc proteins (the
‘desmosome’). However, around 30% of cases are gene elusive (and may be oligogenic/polygenic in aetiology)
and recessive disease is also seen (e.g. Naxos and Carvajal syndromes). This tends to cause a particularly severe
phenotype with a high risk of sudden death and syndromic features such as woolly hair and palmo-plantar
hyperkeratosis.

<!-- page:154 -->
Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults
135
Endurance exercise appears to be a major modifiable risk factor for phenotypic expression, and affected
individuals (and even unaffected gene carriers) should have specialist discussion regarding exercise intensity
and duration.
Clinical presentation
•	 Most patients present with palpitations, syncope or atypical chest pain. However, approximately 40% of
patients are diagnosed with ACM as part of cascade family screening.
•	 Palpitations may represent atrial arrhythmia but sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (often
self-terminating) is common in this condition.
•	 SCD, and appropriate ICD shocks, are more common in ACM than in other cardiomyopathies. Arrhythmia
is frequently exercise-induced, though can occur at rest.
•	 Left-dominant ACM can also present as a DCM phenotype with features of heart failure (e.g. dyspnoea
and signs of RV failure). Genetic testing and the presence of substantial fibrosis (ring-like, biventricular or
involving the epicardium) on CMR may help distinguish the two.
Investigations
•	 12-lead ECG: Anterior T wave inversion (V1-V3/4) +/− epsilon wave (Figure  17.2) is classical for ARVC
phenotype but only present in around 40% of individuals and may be transient. This presentation is
more common in ACM associated with PKP2 mutations. Left-dominant ACM typically shows lateral T wave
inversion but this is non-specific. ACM associated with desmoplakin (DSP) mutations show low voltages in
the limb leads.
•	 Exercise ECG can reveal frequent ectopy, NSVT or sustained ventricular arrhythmia in high-risk individuals.
•	 Ambulatory ECG monitoring is helpful in diagnosis, risk stratification and to investigate symptoms.
•	 Transthoracic echocardiography.
•	 CMR imaging.
•	 Electrophysiologic testing if the diagnosis is not clear.
•	 Genetic testing of first-degree relatives when a diagnosis is confirmed.
Treatment
•	 Avoidance of vigorous exercise/competitive sports due to the risk of life-threatening arrhythmias.
•	 Avoidance of higher volumes of low-intensity exercise due to the risk worsening heart failure
•	 Beta-blockers: Cardioselective blockers such as metoprolol or bisoprolol.
V1
Figure 17.2  Epsilon wave seen in ACM.

<!-- page:155 -->
136
Acute Medicine
•	 Medications as for DCM in LV dysfunction.
•	 Implantable cardioverter defibrillators in selected individuals (risk stratification tools are available).
•	 In severe cases, heart transplantation may be required for HF or intractable arrhythmias.
Unclassified cardiomyopathies
Excessive trabeculation/hypertrabeculation (previously known as LV non-compaction – LVNC) is characterised
by prominent LV trabeculae and deep inter-trabecular recesses. It is an imaging finding that can be seen in
normal individuals, athletes or in association with cardiomyopathy or CHD. It can also occur transiently with
rapid LV dilatation and dysfunction in the context of critical illness, for example. True cardiomyopathy with
excessive trabeculation in adults is rare and is generally associated with sarcomeric mutations when it occurs.
In these families, it is not clear whether the presence of hypertrabeculation carries any additional risk of
arrhythmia or thrombosis over and above that of the underlying cardiomyopathy. It is a common cause of
diagnostic uncertainty and risks over-treatment in adults, but the finding may be of more significance in paediatric cohorts (8).
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is not a true cardiomyopathy as it is not known to be an intrinsic disease of the
heart muscle. However, it is listed as an unclassified cardiomyopathy and is commonly seen on the medical
take. It is characterised by (usually transient) regional systolic dysfunction involving the LV apex and/or midventricle without obstructive coronary disease on coronary angiography. Patients present similarly to myocardial infarction with subacute onset chest pain, diffuse T-wave inversion (sometimes preceded by ST-elevation)
and a mild cardiac enzyme rise. Known colloquially as ‘broken heart syndrome’, onset of the condition is often
preceded by emotional or physical stress. It is more frequent in post-menopausal women. Whilst the aetiology
is not well understood, serum noradrenaline concentrations are transiently elevated in most patients. If the
initial presentation is survived, prognosis is generally good, with LV dysfunction usually normalising within days
to weeks. Recurrence occurs in around 10% and some individuals have persistent changes in the LV myocardium. This pattern of reversible myocardial dysfunction is also sometimes seen in patients sustaining cerebral
injury such as intracranial haemorrhage.
Adult congenital heart disease
With >90% of individuals with CHD in the western world living through to adulthood, the prevalence of adults
living with CHD or the sequelae of CHD is far greater than the number of children with CHD (9). It is therefore
important that general physicians are aware of the common causes of CHD and potential complications.
CHD can be classified by its complexity and by whether it is cyanotic or acyanotic (Table 17.3).
Table 17.3  Example of complexity classification of adult CHD.
Mild
Moderate
Complex
Isolated congenital aortic valve
disease/bicuspid aortic valve disease
Anomalous pulmonary venous
connection
CHD pulmonary vascular disease
(e.g. Eisenmenger syndrome)
Isolated congenital mitral valve disease
Aortic stenosis – subvalvular or
supravalvular
Fontan circulation
Mild isolated pulmonary stenosis
ASD primum or secundum and VSD
Pulmonary atresia
Isolated small ASD, VSD or PDA
Coarctation of the aorta
Transposition of the great arteries
Ebstein anomaly
Truncus arteriosus
Tetralogy of Fallot – repaired
Univentricular heart
Transposition of the great arteries
after arterial switch operation
Source: Adapted from Baumgartner and colleagues (10) ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal defect (ASD), patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA).

<!-- page:156 -->
Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults
137
Cyanotic heart disease
•	 Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF): Comprises four defects: a ventricular septal defect, pulmonary stenosis, overriding
aorta and right ventricular hypertrophy. It is the most common cyanotic heart defect.
•	 Most patients undergo primary intracardiac repair in infancy.
•	 Patients require long-term follow-up and surveillance for complications.
•	 Pulmonary valve replacement is often necessary before development of severe RV dysfunction.
•	 Transposition of the great arteries: The positions of the pulmonary artery and the aorta are reversed, resulting
in two separate circulatory systems that require early surgical intervention with an arterial switch procedure.
•	 Truncus arteriosus: Involves a single large vessel arising from the heart, instead of pulmonary artery and
aorta, and is often accompanied by a VSD.
•	 Tricuspid atresia: Characterised by the absence or abnormal development of the tricuspid valve, leading to
inadequate blood flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle.
•	 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS): HLHS involves underdevelopment of the left side of the heart,
including the left ventricle, aorta and mitral valve. It is a severe condition requiring staged surgeries or heart
transplantation.
•	 Ebstein’s anomaly: Where the tricuspid valve is displaced downward into the right ventricle, leading to
inadequate blood flow and cyanosis.
Acyanotic heart disease
•	 Atrial septal defect (ASD): A defect in the atrial septum allowing oxygenated blood from the left atrium
to mix with deoxygenated blood in the right atrium. Corrected via transcatheter closure or open-heart
surgery.
•	 Ventricular septal defect (VSD): A defect in the septum allowing oxygenated blood from the left ventricle
to mix with deoxygenated blood in the right ventricle. Corrected via transcatheter closure or open-heart
surgery.
•	 Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA): The ductus arteriosus enables the foetus’ circulation to bypass the underdeveloped lungs, but remains open following birth causing abnormal blood flow between the aorta and
pulmonary artery. Corrected through transcatheter closure or surgical ligation.
•	 Coarctation of the aorta: A narrowing of the aorta, usually near the former ductus arteriosus. Corrected with
surgical resection with end-to-end anastomosis or balloon angioplasty with or without stent placement.
•	 Congenital aortic stenosis
•	 Congenital pulmonary Stenosis
Examples of surgical procedures
Fontan procedure
•	 A staged procedure that redirects deoxygenated blood directly to the pulmonary arteries without passing
through the heart, resulting in a single functioning ventricle.
•	 It is performed for conditions such as tricuspid atresia and HLHS.
Norwood procedure
•	 Used to treat HLHS early in life with the aim of providing unobstructed blood flow from right ventricle to
systemic circulation and establishing a controlled source of pulmonary blood flow.
•	 The procedure includes a) construction of a new aorta using pulmonary artery, b) inserting a shunt such as
a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt and c) resecting the atrial septum.
•	 Patients may undergo further surgeries such as a Fontan surgery after this procedure.
Ross procedure
•	 This procedure is used to treat congenital aortic valve disease using a pulmonary autograft.
•	 It involves replacing the aortic valve with a pulmonic valve autograft and right-sided reconstruction with an
aortic or pulmonary homograft.

<!-- page:157 -->
138
Acute Medicine
Atrial arrhythmias in CHD
•	 Atrial arrhythmias are common in CHD, affecting approximately one-fifth of CHD patients and are a major
cause of morbidity.
•	 They can lead to haemodynamic deterioration and so urgent specialist input should be sought, patients
should be aggressively rehydrated where required and cardioversion should be considered early.
Pacemakers in CHD
•	 Generally, indications for pacing are similar in CHD to the general population.
•	 All symptomatic sinus or AV node diseases require pacemaker intervention.
•	 Lead access can pose a difficulty for these patients who require detailed surgical histories and cross-sectional
imaging.
•	 Imaging of the heart and vessels using an echocardiogram with a bubble study or venography is required to
exclude shunts that could lead to paradoxical thromboembolic strokes.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICD) in CHD
•	 As more individuals with CHD live into adulthood, SCD has become the most common cause of mortality
due to the combination of surgical incisions and myocardial scarring creating a substrate for ventricular
arrhythmias.
•	 The same indications to individuals without CHD apply, but in addition:
1	 Adults with CHD and presumed cardiogenic syncope with at least moderate ventricular dysfunction or
inducible sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia.
2	 Individuals with a single ventricle or systemic RV dysfunction with an additional risk factor may be
considered.
3	 Individuals with repaired TOF with arrhythmogenic symptoms, risk factors or before further interventions
may be considered.
Anticoagulation in CHD
•	 Stroke is a major cause of morbidity in patients with adult CHD.
•	 It is recommended that individuals with moderate or complex defects and AF should be anticoagulated
regardless of the CHA2DS2-VASc score.
References
1	 Srinivasan NT, Schilling R. (2018) Sudden cardiac death and arrhythmias. Arrhythmia Electrophysiol Rev
7(2), 111–117.
2	 Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, et al. (2008) Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position
statement from the European society of cardiology working group on myocardial and pericardial diseases.
Eur Heart J 29(2), 270–276.
3	 Elliott P, McKenna WJ. (2004) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Lancet 363(9424), 1881–1891.
4	 Maron BJ, McKenna WJ, Danielson GK, et al. (2003) American College of Cardiology/European Society of
Cardiology clinical expert consensus document on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents and the European
Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 42(9), 1687–1713.
5	 Robinson K, Frenneaux MP, Stockins B, et al. (1990) Atrial fibrillation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
a longitudinal study. J Am Coll Cardiol 15(6), 1279–1285.
6	 McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. (2022) 2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
acute and chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 24(1), 4–131.

<!-- page:158 -->
Cardiomyopathies and congenital heart disease in adults
139
  7	 Petretta M, Pirozzi F, Sasso L, et al. (2011) Review and metaanalysis of the frequency of familial dilated
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 108(8), 1171–1176.
  8	 Nugent AW, Daubeney PE, Chondros P, et al. (2005) Clinical features and outcomes of childhood
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: results from a national population-based study. Circulation 112(9),
1332–1338.
  9	 Moons P, Bovijn L, Budts W, et al. (2010) Temporal trends in survival to adulthood among patients born
with congenital heart disease from 1970 to 1992 in Belgium. Circulation 122(22), 2264–2272.
10	 Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. (2021) 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease: The Task Force for the management of adult congenital heart disease
of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: association for European Paediatric and
Congenital Cardiology (AEPC), International Society for Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ISACHD).
Eur Heart J 42(6), 563–645.
