# CHAPTER 21 Hypertensive emergencies

- Pages: 179-187
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:179 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 21
160
Severe hypertension is characterised by a systolic blood pressure over 180 mmHg or a diastolic blood pressure
over 120 mmHg. Acute management is determined by the clinical context and the presence and type of organ
damage. Intravenous therapy, although warranted in certain situations, is potentially dangerous, as a sudden
drop in blood pressure may lead to cerebral, myocardial or renal ischaemia.
The management of the patient with severe hypertension is summarised in Figure 21.1.
Priorities
Establish the context and comorbidities by focused clinical assessment and investigation (Tables 21.1 and 21.2).
Management of severe hypertension in specific contexts is discussed below. If IV therapy is indicated, transfer
the patient to an intensive therapy unit (ITU) or high-dependency unit (HDU) for arterial blood pressure
monitoring and general care.
Acute aortic dissection and other acute aortic syndromes
•	 Make sure adequate analgesia with morphine has been given, as untreated pain and distress can exacerbate
hypertension.
•	 Put in an arterial line to allow continuous BP monitoring and a bladder catheter to monitor urine output.
•	 Start labetalol IV (Table 21.3). Give a bolus of 20 mg over 2 min, followed by an infusion of 1–6 mg/min,
increasing the infusion rate every 10 min as needed to achieve target systolic BP and heart rate.
•	 Target systolic BP is 120 mmHg within 20–30 min, and heart rate < 60/min, providing urine output remains
>30 mL/h, and there is no other clinical evidence of organ ischaemia.
•	 If target BP is not achieved with labetalol 6 mg/min, add a nitrate infusion (Table 21.3).
•	 Start or increase oral therapy.
•	 See Chapter 18 for further management of aortic dissection.
Acute ischaemic stroke
•	 See Chapter 56 for the assessment of the patient with ischaemic stroke.
•	 If the patient is a candidate for thrombolysis, start antihypertensive therapy if BP is >185/110 mmHg, aiming
to reduce BP below this. If BP is not maintained at or below 185/110 mmHg, do not give thrombolysis.
•	 If the patient is not a candidate for thrombolysis, start therapy if BP is greater >220/120 mmHg. Aim to
reduce mean arterial pressure (estimated by diastolic BP plus one-third of pulse pressure) by no more than
15% in the first 24 h.
Hypertensive emergencies
David Sprigings and Zainab Zafar
CHAPTER 21

<!-- page:180 -->
Hypertensive emergencies
161
•	 Give labetalol 10 mg IV bolus over 1 min, followed by an infusion of 1–8 mg/min, increasing the infusion rate
every 10 min as needed to achieve target BP.
•	 If target BP is not achieved with labetalol 8 mg/min, add a nicardipine infusion (Table 21.3) at 5 mg/h, and
increase the infusion rate by 2.5 mg/h every 10 min to a maximum of 15 mg/h.
Intracerebral haemorrhage
•	 If the patient presents within 6 h of the onset of intracerebral haemorrhage, with systolic BP >150 mmHg,
start antihypertensive therapy.
•	 Target systolic BP is 140 mmHg within 6 h and maintained for at least 7 days. Ensure that the drop in BP does
not exceed more than 60 mmHg within the first hour.
•	 Give labetalol or nicardipine by infusion (as for acute ischaemic stroke).
•	 Start or increase oral therapy.
Yes
No
Severe hypertension
Arbitrarily deﬁned as systolic BP > 180
and/or diastolic >120 mmHg
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment (Table 21.1)
Urgent investigation (Table 21.2)
Pregnancy or early
postpartum period?
Yes
Pre-eclampsia is likely diagnosis
(Chapter 103)
Start IV labetalol (Table 21.4)
Urgent obstetric opinion
Rapid control of BP needed?
• Hypertensive encephalopathy
   (Table 21.3)
• Aortic dissection (Chapter 18)
• Severe pulmonary edema (Chapter 14)
Transfer to intensive therapy unit
(ITU)/high-dependency unit
(HDU) IV labetalol (Table 21.4)
for hypertensive encephalopathy
or aortic dissection
IV furosemide/nitrate for severe
pulmonary edema
Supportive care
No
Admit if:
• Diastolic BP >130 mmHg
• Interstitial pulmonary edema
• Retinal hemorrhages or
  papilledema
• Renal failure
Start/modify appropriate oral therapy (Table 21.5)
Search for cause of hypertension (Table 21.6)
Seek nephrology opinion if renal failure or
suspected renal/renovascular cause
Figure 21.1  Management of the patient with severe hypertension.

<!-- page:181 -->
162
Acute Medicine
Table 21.1  Focused assessment in severe hypertension.
History
•	 Is the patient known to have hypertension? What treatment has been given? What is the compliance with treatment?
What investigations have been done to exclude an underlying cause for hypertension? Is there associated cardiac or
renal disease?
•	 Pregnant or within three months of giving birth?
•	 Drug history? Recent use of drugs that may give hyperadrenergic state (e.g. cocaine, amphetamines and phencyclidine)?
•	 Any symptoms to suggest stroke or subarachnoid haemorrhage, aortic dissection, acute coronary syndrome and
pulmonary oedema?
Examination
•	 Measure the blood pressure in both arms.
•	 Check for signs of heart failure and aortic regurgitation.
•	 Check the presence and symmetry of the major pulses, and for radio-femoral delay.
•	 Listen for carotid, abdominal and femoral bruits.
•	 Examine the abdomen (palpable kidneys or bladder?)
•	 Examine the fundi: are there retinal haemorrhages, exudates or papilloedema (not due to other causes), which define
accelerated-phase or ‘malignant’ hypertension?
•	 Assess the conscious level and for focal neurological signs.
Table 21.2  Urgent investigation in severe hypertension.
Electrolytes and renal function (check daily)
Blood glucose
Plasma renin/aldosterone (for later analysis)
Plasma troponin, if acute coronary syndrome suspected
Plasma BNP or NT-proBNP, if heart failure suspected
Full blood count
Urine stick test and microscopy (renal impairment with minimal proteinuria suggests renal artery stenosis)
Ultrasonography of kidneys and urinary tract
Urinary catecholamine excretion
Urinary free cortisol excretion if Cushing syndrome suspected
Chest X-ray
ECG
Echocardiography, if heart failure suspected
Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, if there are neurological symptoms,
headache, nausea and vomiting, or retinal haemorrhages, exudates or papilloedema
Contrast-enhanced CT of the chest, if aortic dissection is suspected.
Table 21.3  Intravenous therapy for severe hypertension with organ damage.
Drug
Properties
Administration
Labetalol
Beta- and alpha-adrenergic blocker
IV bolus: 10–20 mg over 1–2 min
IV infusion: 1–8 mg/min (see text)
Esmolol
Short-acting beta-adrenergic blocker
IV bolus: 1 mg/kg over 30 s
IV infusion: 150–300 μgm/kg/min (see text)
Isosorbide dinitrate
Nitric-oxide-mediated vasodilatation
IV infusion: 2–12 mg/h (see text)
Nicardipine
Dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker
IV infusion: 5–15 mg/h (see text)
Phentolamine
Short-acting non-selective alpha-adrenergic
blocker
IV bolus: 1 mg (response is maximal in
2–3 min and lasts 10–15 min)
IV infusion: 1 mg/h

<!-- page:182 -->
Hypertensive emergencies
163
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Make sure adequate analgesia has been given.
•	 If systolic BP is >160 mmHg, start antihypertensive therapy.
•	 Target systolic BP is <160 mmHg.
•	 Give labetalol or nicardipine by infusion (as for acute ischaemic stroke).
•	 See Chapter 53 for further management of subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Hypertensive encephalopathy
•	 This is rare. Hypertensive encephalopathy is due to cerebral oedema resulting from hyperperfusion, as a
consequence of severe hypertension, with failure of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. Clinical features
are summarized in Table 21.3.
•	 It may be difficult to distinguish clinically between hypertensive encephalopathy, subarachnoid haemorrhage
and stroke. Hypertensive encephalopathy is favoured by the gradual onset of symptoms and the absence (or
late appearance) of focal neurological signs. CT should be done to exclude other diagnoses. In hypertensive
encephalopathy, neurological status improves with lowering of blood pressure.
•	 Target BP is 10–20% lower than initial BP after 1 h of therapy, and 25% lower after 24 h.
•	 Give labetalol or nicardipine by infusion, as for ischaemic stroke.
•	 Start or increase oral therapy.
Acute heart failure
•	 Treat with a nitrate infusion plus a loop diuretic IV (e.g. furosemide 40 mg initially).
•	 See Chapter 14 for further management of acute pulmonary oedema and acute heart failure.
Acute coronary syndrome
•	 Make sure adequate analgesia has been given.
•	 Treat with a nitrate infusion plus esmolol IV (Table 21.3).
•	 See Chapter 12 for further management of acute coronary syndromes. Revascularisation is the priority in
acute coronary syndrome with ST-segment elevation.
Phaeochromocytoma hypertensive crisis
•	 See Chapter 47 for the diagnosis and management of phaeochromocytoma.
•	 Treat with phentolamine IV (Table 21.3). Seek expert advice from an endocrinologist.
Table 21.4  Hypertensive encephalopathy
Early features
•	 Headache
•	 Nausea and vomiting
•	 Delirium
•	 Retinal haemorrhages, exudates or papilloedema
Late features
•	 Focal neurological signs
•	 Fits
•	 Coma

<!-- page:183 -->
164
Acute Medicine
Suspected pre-eclampsia/eclampsia: pregnant or within
three months of giving birth
•	 The diagnosis of pre-eclampsia/eclampsia is discussed in Chapter 103.
•	 Seek urgent advice from an obstetrician.
•	 Target BP is 130–150/80–100 mmHg.
•	 Give labetalol 20 mg IV bolus over 2 min, followed by an infusion of 1–2 mg/min.
•	 If there is pulmonary oedema, add nitrate IV.
Cocaine-induced hypertension
•	 Sedation with a benzodiazepine is the preferred initial treatment for cocaine-induced hypertension.
•	 Target diastolic BP is 100–105 mmHg within 2–6 h.
•	 Blood pressure will fall as cocaine is metabolized. If treatment in addition to benzodiazepine is needed,
use phentolamine IV.
Other patients with BP > 180/110 mmHg
1	 Recheck the blood pressure after the patient has rested for 30 min in a quiet room. Admit for investigation
and management if there are any of the following features:
•	 Retinal haemorrhages, exudates or papilloedema.
•	 Acute kidney injury.
•	 Interstitial pulmonary oedema.
•	 Diastolic pressure > 130 mmHg.
2	 Start or increase oral therapy. Aim to reduce BP to 160/100 mmHg over the first 24 h:
•	 Initial therapy for the patient who is not already receiving anti-hypertensive therapy is given in Table 21.5.
•	 Nifedipine MR should be co-administered with amlodipine for the first three days of treatment with
amlodipine (as amlodipine has a large volume of distribution and is therefore of limited efficacy during
this period).
•	 For patients already on treatment, check compliance, prescribe usual treatment at increased dose if
appropriate, or add an agent from another class. If the patient is already taking triple therapy with an
ACE-inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker, a calcium-channel blocker and a thiazide, consider adding
spironolactone 25–50 mg daily.
Table 21.5  Initial oral therapy for severe hypertension in a patient not already receiving anti-hypertensive therapy.
Clinical setting
Drug therapy
Phaeochromocytoma suspected (see Table 21.6)
Labetalol 100–200 mg 12-hourly PO
Renal artery stenosis suspected (see Table 21.6)
Amlodipine* 5–10 mg daily PO plus
Bisoprolol 2.5–5 mg daily PO
Heart failure (see Chapter 14)
Amlodipine* 5–10 mg daily PO plus
Furosemide 20–40 mg daily PO
Other patients, either with type 2 diabetes (of any
age or family origin) or aged < 55 but not of Black
African or African–Caribbean heritage
ACE-inhibitor (ACEi) or angiotensin-receptor blocker (ARB)
ARB should be given in preference to ACEi to patients of Black
African or African–Caribbean family origin
Other patients without type 2 diabetes, aged > 55
or of Black African or African–Caribbean heritage
Calcium-channel blocker or thiazide (if fluid retention present)
* Nifedipine MR should be co-administered with amlodipine for the first three days of treatment with amlodipine
(as amlodipine has a large volume of distribution, and is therefore of limited efficacy during this period).

<!-- page:184 -->
Hypertensive emergencies
165
3	 What is causing severe hypertension?
Causes of secondary hypertension, and clues to specific diagnoses, are summarized in Table 21.6.
4	 Seek advice from a nephrologist if there is
•	 Acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease.
•	 Evidence of acute glomerulonephritis or vasculitis (2+ or more proteinuria and/or red cell casts in the urine).
•	 Suspected renal artery stenosis (see Table 21.6).
•	 Suspected scleroderma renal crisis (a complication of systemic sclerosis characterised by hypertension with
acute kidney injury, microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia and hypertensive retinopathy; hypertensive encephalopathy, acute heart failure and acute pericarditis may also be present).
Further reading
Kulkarni S, Glover G, Kapil V, et al. (2023) Management of hypertensive crisis: British and Irish Hypertension
Society position document. J Hum Hypertens 37, 863–879.
Miller JB, Hrabec D, Krishnamoorthy V, et al. (2024) Evaluation and management of hypertensive emergency.
BMJ 386, e077205.
Table 21.6  Causes of secondary hypertension.
Cause
Clues/investigation
Intrinsic renal disease
May have family history of heritable renal disease (e.g. polycystic kidney disease)
Abnormal urine stick test and microscopy
Raised creatinine
Abnormal kidneys on ultrasound
Discuss further investigation with nephrologist if intrinsic renal disease suspected
Primary
hyperaldosteronism
Low plasma potassium
High plasma aldosterone with suppressed plasma renin
Typically due to aldosterone-producing adenoma or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
Cushing syndrome
Truncal obesity, thin skin with purple abdominal striae, proximal myopathy
Increased urinary-free cortisol excretion
Due to pituitary or adrenal disease, or exogenous corticosteroid
Phaeochromocytoma
Paroxysmal headache, sweating or palpitation
Hypertensive crisis following anaesthesia or administration of contrast
May have family history of pheochromocytoma
Increased urinary catecholamine excretion
Coarctation of aorta
Radiofemoral delay
Coarctation demonstrated by echocardiography, CT or MRI
Renal artery stenosis
May be due to fibromuscular dysplasia (age < 50 with no family history of
hypertension) or, more commonly, to atherosclerosis (age > 50 with other
atherosclerotic arterial disease)
Refractory hypertension
Deteriorating blood pressure control in compliant, long-standing hypertensive patients
Rise in creatinine on treatment with ACE-inhibitor
Renal impairment with minimal proteinuria
Low plasma potassium due to secondary hyperaldosteronism
Difference in kidney size >1.5 cm on ultrasound
Other causes
Many causes including drugs, obstructive sleep apnoea, acromegaly

<!-- page:186 -->
Respiratory Medicine
SECTION 3
