# CHAPTER 22 Acute asthma

- Pages: 188-192
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:188 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
169
Asthma (Box 22.1) is one of the most common causes of breathlessness and wheeze, but other causes should
be considered, especially if the response to initial treatment is slow (Table 22.1).
The severity of an attack is easily underestimated (Table 22.2).
It is important to establish the severity of the exacerbation to monitor progress and determine if early
involvement of the intensive care team is required.
Priorities
Is this acute asthma? If so, how severe?
Many other diseases can mimic acute asthma (Table 22.1). Important diagnoses to consider include:
An exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Chapter 23). The patient tends to be older,
with a smoking history.
Upper airway obstruction (Chapter 105). PEF is disproportionately lower than the FEV1.
Vocal cord dysfunction. Symptoms can be similar to asthma, but usually the periods of breathlessness are
short, with difficulty in inspiration (as opposed to expiration in asthma).
Anaphylaxis may also present with wheeze and breathlessness, but typically there are additional features
such as urticarial rash and hypotension (Chapter 4).
The severity of acute asthma can be judged by the clinical features and PEF (Table 22.2).
Acute asthma
Swapna Mandal
CHAPTER 22
•	 Asthma is characterized by variable airway obstruction and defined by the presence of one or more of the
following symptoms: breathlessness, wheeze, chest tightness or cough, with reversible airway obstruction
shown by diurnal variation in peak expiratory flow >25%.
•	 The National Review of Asthma Deaths has shown that the United Kingdom has one of the highest death rates
for asthma in Europe, with 195 deaths attributable to an acute exacerbation between 2012 and 2013.
•	 Acute asthma is diagnosed by worsening symptoms with associated signs and a reduction in the patient’s usual
peak expiratory flow (PEF).
Box 22.1  Asthma.

<!-- page:189 -->
170
Acute Medicine
Immediate management
All patients presenting with an acute exacerbation of asthma should receive oxygen therapy to maintain an
arterial oxygen saturation between 94 and 98% (Figure 22.1).
High-dose nebulized β-agonists (5 mg salbutamol) should be given as quickly as possible (the nebulizer
should preferably be driven by oxygen); doses can be repeated every 15–30 min.
Ipratropium bromide (500 mcg 6-hourly) can be given to those with acute severe or life-threatening asthma,
or in those who have a poor initial response to salbutamol.
Table 22.1  Differential diagnosis of acute asthma.
Disorder
Comment
Acute
exacerbation of
chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
A relevant smoking history will assist in differentiating between an exacerbation of asthma and
an exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).
Upper airway
obstruction
These individuals may have a more chronic course; however, they may present acutely, for
example inhalation of a foreign body or acute anaphylaxis. The key in determining the
differences will be in the history. In a more chronic setting, flow-volume loops are very helpful.
Vocal cord
dysfunction
Acutely Vocal Cord Dysfunction (VCD) can present in a similar manner to acute asthma. It can
be difficult to differentiate VCD from asthma as some patients with VCD may also have asthma
and respond to acute treatment. Arterial blood gases will be normal in VCD and often patients
with VCD find inspiration more difficult than expiration.
Anaphylaxis
Individuals with anaphylaxis can have wheeze and allergy is common in those with asthma. The
key to determining the difference will be the history, that is, an acute trigger in those with
anaphylaxis and other signs such as an urticarial rash and angioedema. Treatment for both will
include bronchodilators and steroids. Individuals with anaphylaxis will also require adrenaline.
In atypical histories, signs or symptoms, other important diagnoses to consider:
Gastrooesophageal reflux
This often presents more chronically as a cough; however, gastro-oesophageal reflux can
exacerbate symptoms of asthma.
Cystic fibrosis
This is an inherited disorder resulting in deficiency of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
receptor. These individuals often have bronchiectasis and can also develop cystic fibrosis-related
asthma and can therefore present with wheeze and cough. Often these patients will also have
thick sputum that can be difficult to expectorate, this would be an unusual finding in those
with asthma that is not related to CF.
Heart failure
Heart failure can also present with breathlessness and wheeze. The history is key, the
symptoms are often progressive over a period of time, heart failure tends to occur in the
older population and those with a significant history of cardiac disease. These individuals
will respond well to diuresis.
Foreign body
aspiration
There will often be a very acute history involving a feeling of ‘choking’ whilst having eaten
something. If the foreign body is lodged within the upper airway and there is complete
obstruction, respiratory arrest may occur. Partial obstruction of the upper airway may cause
stridor. If the foreign body passes below the carina a more chronic course of symptoms will
occur, such as cough, wheeze and recurrent infection.
Eosinophilic lung
disease
Eosinophilic pneumonias are a group of disorders characterized by peripheral blood eosinophilia
and evidence of eosinophilia within the airways. Causes of eosinophilic pneumonia include:
helminth and tropical infections; medication such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and antibiotics; Churg–Strauss syndrome (eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis);
ABPA and idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonias. The history and searching for a trigger, for example
medication or travel to endemic areas will assist in the diagnosis. These individuals tend to present
with a chronic course of symptoms and blood tests, and often bronchoscopy/lung biopsy may be
necessary to clinch the diagnosis. Many of these conditions will respond to steroid treatment.

<!-- page:190 -->
Acute asthma
171
Corticosteroids should be administered immediately. Either 40–50 mg of oral prednisolone daily or hydrocortisone 100 mg 6-hourly IV or IM should be given. Corticosteroids should be given for a minimum
of 5 days.
Table 22.2  Assessment of severity of acute asthma.
Moderate exacerbation
of asthma
Acute severe asthma
Life-threatening asthma
Symptoms
Worsening chest tightness,
breathlessness, wheeze, cough
Worsening chest tightness,
breathlessness, wheeze, cough
PEF
50–75% of best/predicted
33–50% of best/predicted
<33% of best/predicted
Physiological
variables
RR > 25 breaths/min
SaO2 < 92%
HR > 110 breaths/min
PaO2 < 8 kPa PaCO2
4.6–6.0 kPa
Other signs
Unable to complete sentences
in one breath
Reduced GCS
Exhaustion
Silent chest
Cyanosis
Poor respiratory effort
Arrhythmia
Hypotension
Source: Adapted from BTS/SIGN/NICE guidelines.
Immediate
for all patients
Review after
initial treatment
Further review
• Start oxygen therapy to maintain SpO2 94–98%
• Salbutamol 5 mg nebulised every 15–30 min
• Steroids (40–45 mg prednisolone PO or 100 mg of IV hydrocortisone)
In those with poor response to initial treatment or acute severe or life-threatening asthma
• Ipratropium bromide 500 mcg nebulised
• Magnesium sulphate 1.2–2 g IV over 20 min
• Aminophylline IV* (5 mg/kg loading dose over 20 min) followed by 0.5 mg/kg/h
*After discussion with senior medical staff.
If the patient is not improving:
• Contact ITU for early intervention
Figure 22.1  Management of acute asthma. Source: Adapted from BTS/SIGN/NICE guidelines.

<!-- page:191 -->
172
Acute Medicine
In those with acute severe asthma with poor response to initial therapy or life-threatening asthma, a single
dose of magnesium sulphate (1.2–2 g IV over 20 min) can be given.
Aminophylline may be considered in those with life-threatening asthma where there has been poor response
to treatment and discussion with senior medical staff has taken place. A loading dose of 5 mg/kg should be
given parenterally over 20 min (omit if the patient is on oral aminophylline) followed by an infusion of
0.5 mg/kg/h.
Consider referral to ITU if: hypoxia worsens, hypercapnia or acidaemia is evident, the patient is exhausting,
GCS is deteriorating or PEF is deteriorating.
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) is not recommended for asthma and should not be given outside the intensive
care environment.
Other treatments
•	 Antibiotics may be considered in those with signs of infection but should not be routinely used in the management of acute asthma.
•	 Patients who are dehydrated may require IV fluids.
Investigations and monitoring
Whilst treating these patients, investigations can be initiated, these include (Table 22.3):
•	 PEF (once the patient is stabilized PEF should continue to be monitored).
•	 Arterial blood gas (ABG).
•	 Serum electrolytes (as patients will be receiving salbutamol, they may become hypokalaemic).
•	 Chest X-ray to rule out exacerbating factors including pneumothorax or pneumonia.
Further management
All patients with life-threatening asthma must be admitted. Those with moderate or acute severe asthma may
be considered for discharge home (Figure 22.2). Pitfalls to avoid are summarised in Box 22.2.
Asthma in pregnancy
Asthma control can deteriorate in pregnancy. Pregnant women with acute asthma should be treated in exactly
the same manner as those who are not pregnant. In addition, there should be continuous foetal monitoring
and involvement of the obstetric team.
Table 22.3  Monitoring of the patient with acute asthma.
Regular monitoring
To be monitored as required
Peak expiratory flow rate
ABG (initially if SpO2 < 92% and repeat after treatment)
SaO2
Serum theophylline concentrations
Respiratory rate
Serum electrolytes
Heart rate

<!-- page:192 -->
Acute asthma
173
Further reading
British Thoracic Society and Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2016) British guideline on the
management of asthma: a national clinical guideline. Available from https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/
document-library/clinical-information/asthma/btssign-asthma-guideline-2016/.
Moderate asthma
Acute severe asthma
Life threatening asthma
If after initial treatment:
Patient is clinically stable
AND
PEF >75%
Consider discharge home with
prednisolone 40–50 mg for 5 days
and early GP follow up (2 days) and
referral to chest clinic
If above criteria not
met ADMIT patient
Consider discharge home with
prednisolone 40–50 mg for 5 days
and early GP follow up (2 days) and
referral to chest clinic
If above criteria not met or ongoing
signs of severe or life threatening
asthma ADMIT
Patient will require initial inpatient
admission for observation and
monitoring and continued treatment.
If patient stabilises AND PEF >50%
OR
Patient stable after initial treatment
AND PEFR >75%
All patients with life threatening
asthma will require ADMISSION
with early ICU involvement
Figure 22.2  Discharge planning of the patient with acute asthma. Source: Adapted from BTS/SIGN guidelines.
•	 Be vigilant for pneumothoraces; small ones may be difficult to detect.
•	 Beware of the tiring patient. Escalate treatment and involve the ICU team if:

◦Wheeze disappears: this is a silent chest not an improvement in symptoms.

◦PaCO2 normalizes.
•	 If you are giving a one-off stat dose of IV hydrocortisone, ensure you give a dose of oral
prednisolone also.
•	 Ensure at discharge that:

◦Inhaled corticosteroid is started in addition to a course of oral steroids.

◦Inhaler technique is checked.

◦Smoking cessation advice given if necessary.

◦A peak flow meter is given to continue monitoring.

◦Specialist follow-up is arranged (urgently for those with an acute, severe or life-threatening
episode).
Box 22.2  Pitfalls in the management of acute asthma.
