# CHAPTER 24 Haemoptysis

- Pages: 200-203
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:200 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
181
Haemoptysis
Haemoptysis, deriving its name from the Greek words ‘haima’ (blood) and ‘ptysis’ (spitting), is the presence of
blood within sputum and ranges from blood-streaking of sputum to gross blood in the absence of any accompanying sputum. The causes of haemoptysis are shown in Table 24.1.
The term life-threatening haemoptysis (formerly massive haemoptysis) was previously used to describe the
expectoration of a large amount of blood within a particular period of time. However, criteria based solely on
the volume of blood cannot be used precisely since quantifying the amount of blood that a patient has expectorated is challenging and small amounts in patients with underlying cardiorespiratory disease may be enough
to endanger life. Therefore, in clinical practice the term ‘life-threatening haemoptysis’ is more useful. It pertains
to cases that lead to airway obstruction, significant disruptions in gas exchange, or haemodynamic
Haemoptysis
Ahmed Yousuf
CHAPTER 24
Table 24.1  Causes of haemoptysis.
Cause
Comment
Bronchogenic carcinoma*
Frank haemoptysis or blood-stained sputum, weight loss, cough, risk factors for lung
cancer
Tuberculosis (TB)*
Cough, fever, night sweat, weight loss, risk factors for TB (e.g. homeless, from high
prevalent countries)
Bronchiectasis*
Chronic cough with purulent sputum, known history of bronchiectasis, previous episodes
of haemoptysis
Pneumonia*
‘Rusty’ sputum, fever, cough, consolidation on chest X-ray (CXR)
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
Pleuritic chest pain, breathlessness, risk factors for PE
Pulmonary oedema
Frothy ‘pink’ sputum, breathlessness, ↑JVP, bilateral pitting oedema of legs, raised
NT-pro-BNP, pulmonary oedema on CXR
Vasculitides**
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegner’s), Goodpasture’s
syndrome, SLE
Mycetoma**
Fungal ball on CXR, previous TB
Arteriovenous
malformation**
Recurrent haemoptysis, Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome (telangiectasia)
Iatrogenic**
Post-lung biopsy or bronchoscopy
* Common.
** Rare.

<!-- page:201 -->
182
Acute Medicine
compromise. One limitation of this definition is that it excludes those patients with a good physiological
reserve who can expectorate large volumes of blood without significant clinical deterioration during the early
stages of life-threatening haemoptysis.
Assessment
The primary objectives of the initial assessment are to ascertain the extent and intensity of bleeding, pinpoint
the origin of the bleeding and establish a list of potential diagnoses (Table 24.1).
History
A focused history is essential. This should evaluate the severity of haemoptysis and the clues pointing towards
the underlying aetiology, including smoking history, existing medical conditions, medications (e.g. anticoagulant) and family history.
Physical examination
A targeted physical examination should aim to gauge the extent of respiratory impairment, and identify clues
of diseases beyond the respiratory system (e.g. telangiectasia indicating Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome, skin
rash may suggest underlying vasculitis).
Management
•	 Management is summarized in Figure 24.1. Haemoptysis can be distinguished from haematemesis by its
colour and pH: haemoptysis is bright red and alkaline, haematemesis is brown (‘coffee ground’) and acidic.
Bleeding from the nasopharynx may be mistaken for haemoptysis: if in doubt, ask the advice of ear, nose
and throat (ENT) surgeon.
Haemoptysis
Life-threatening haemoptysis
Is the patient at terminal stage of
lung cancer or chronic lung disease?
Yes
No
Palliate
Stabilize the
patient (Table 24.2)
Investigate and
treat (Table 24.3)
Non-life-threatening haemoptysis
i.   Abnormal CXR
ii.  Current or ex-smoker
iii. Age >40 years
iv. Past history of lung cancer
Yes to one or more
No to all
If well and stable refer to
respiratory physician for outpatient
investigation and management
Reassure and advise
to seek medical help
if it happens again
Figure 24.1  Management of haemoptysis.

<!-- page:202 -->
Haemoptysis
183
•	 In the majority of cases, haemoptysis originates from the bronchial circulation. Bronchial arteries usually arise
directly from the aorta and carry blood at systemic blood pressure. Therefore, bleeding that originates from
bronchial circulation causes life-threatening haemoptysis; if left untreated it has a mortality rate of up to
80%. Management of life-threatening haemoptysis is summarized in Table 24.2.
•	 Investigation of haemoptysis is given in Table 24.3.
Management of life-threatening haemoptysis
The priority is to stabilize the patient, identify the bleeding site and stop the bleeding (Table 24.2). Active
intervention is not appropriate for all patients and in some cases (e.g. metastatic lung cancer, end-stage
chronic pulmonary or cardiac disease) a palliative approach might be the best option.
Table 24.2  Management of life-threatening haemoptysis.
1.	 Airway protection and improving ventilation: this could be achieved by sitting up the patient, or lying the patient
on the bleeding side (if known) to avoid spillage of blood to the unaffected lung. Give oxygen to maintain oxygen
saturation above 94% (unless the patient is known to have chronic type 2 respiratory failure).
2.	 Cardiovascular support:
•	 Insert two large bore (at least 16 gauge) cannulas.
•	 Send blood for FBC/cross match/clotting screen/renal function.
•	 Fluid resuscitation.
•	 Blood transfusion (if Hb < 70 g/L).
•	 Arterial +/− CVP line (in HDU/ICU setting).
3.	 Assess patient’s GCS, if <8 or unable to protect airway, ask for anaesthetist’s help.
4.	 Correct any clotting disorders as per hospital protocol.
5.	 Give IV tranexamic acid (1 g TDS, avoid if known renal failure).
6.	 Consider giving nebulized adrenaline (1 mL of 1 : 1000 with 4 mL of NaCl 0.9%).
7.	 Consider giving intravenous terlipressin (2 mg IV stat, then 1 mg IV every 4–6 h).
Once patient is stabilized arrange:
8.	 Bronchoscopy (flexible or rigid): diagnostic (biopsy, bronchial wash) and therapeutic interventions (e.g. injecting
cold saline or 1 : 20,000 adrenaline, cryocautery and diathermy) can be undertaken.
9.	 Endovascular embolization: most effective and minimally invasive procedure in managing haemoptysis.
10.	 Surgery: resection of the bleeding lobe (if all other measures have failed).
Table 24.3  Investigation of haemoptysis.
Full blood count
Clotting screen
Renal function
ECG
Auto-antibodies (ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM), urine dip and microscopy for red cells casts (if vasculitides are suspected)
Arterial blood gases if O2 saturation < 92%
CXR can help with lateralizing bleeding and may reveal a focal or diffuse lung involvement. It has 35–50% positive
diagnostic yield. A quarter of patients presenting with haemoptysis due to malignancy will have normal CXR.
Sputum Ziehl–Neelsen stains and culture, if there is suspicion of TB.
CT scan – CT bronchial arteriography if bleeding is thought to be originating from bronchial circulation. If it does not
identify the source of bleeding, and there is a high suspicion of the pulmonary artery source of bleeding, then CT
pulmonary angiogram should be performed. Performing CT scan before bronchoscopy will improve diagnostic yield.
Bronchoscopy (flexible or rigid): it helps to visualize the airways and localize the site of bleeding.

<!-- page:203 -->
184
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Kathuria H, Hollingsworth HM, Vilvendhan R, Reardon C. (2020) Management of life-threatening
hemoptysis. J Intensive Care 8, 23.
Larici AR, Franchi P, Occhipinti M. (2014) Diagnosis and management of hemoptysis. Diagn Interv Radiol 20,
299–309.
Radchenko C, Alraiyes AH, Shojaee S. (2017) A systemic approach to the management of massive
hemoptysis. J Thorac Dis 9(Supplement 10), S1069–S1086.
