# CHAPTER 25 Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB

- Pages: 204-215
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:204 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
185
Community-acquired pneumonia
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is a very common respiratory infectious disease. Incidence of CAP
ranges between 1 and 25 cases per 1000 head of population per year. CAP (see Box 25.1 for definition)
usually presents with acute respiratory symptoms, but should always be considered in patients with unexplained sepsis or delirium. Examination of the chest may be normal and, if you suspect pneumonia, a chest
X-ray (CXR) is needed to make the diagnosis. Approximately 40% of patients with CAP will require hospitalisation, and 5% of these patients will be admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). See Figure 25.1 for management of CAP.
A broad range of pathogens can cause CAP. Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) is the main pathogen that causes CAP worldwide, independent of age. Other common pathogens are Staphylococcus aureus,
Haemophilus influenza and the so-called atypical bacteria (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae,
Chlamydia psittaci and Coxiella burnetii).
In recent years, the availability of molecular microbiological tests has increased isolation of respiratory viruses
in CAP. In adults, viruses, particularly influenza, rhinovirus and coronaviruses, cause a third of cases of
pneumonia.
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
Ahmed Yousuf
CHAPTER 25
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP): pneumonia acquired outside hospital, or which appears
within 48 h of admission to hospital.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP): pneumonia that develops 48 h or longer after hospital admission, and was not subclinical on admission.
Lower respiratory tract infection: an acute illness with cough and at least one other lower respiratory tract symptom, presumed to be due to infection. The definition includes pneumonia, acute bronchitis and infective exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Box 25.1  Definitions.

<!-- page:205 -->
186
Acute Medicine
Priorities
Is this pneumonia? How severe is it?
•	 Suspect pneumonia in the presence of one or more of the following clinical features:
•	 Fever
•	 Cough
•	 Purulent sputum
•	 Dyspnoea
•	 Pleuritic chest pain
•	 Focal lung crackles or bronchial breathing
•	 Consider the differential diagnosis (Table 25.1). A CXR showing new focal shadowing is essential for the
diagnosis (Table 25.2). Other investigations needed are given in Table 25.3.
•	 The severity of CAP can be assessed by the CURB-65 score (Table 25.4).
Clinical features suggestive of CAP
Chest X-ray
No consolidation
Consolidation
Pursue other diagnoses
Criteria for CAP?
Yes
No
Consider other causes
(Table 25.5)
Treat according to CURB-65 severity score
Low severity (0–1)
Other reasons for
hospital admission
Discharge
home, oral
antibiotics
(Table 25.6)
Admit to
hospital, oral
antibiotics
(Table 25.6)
Admit to hospital
Investigations (Table
25.3)
Antibiotics (Table
25.6)
Supportive care
(Table 25.7)
Admit to hospital
Investigations (Table
25.3)
Antibiotics (Table 25.6)
Supportive care
(Table 25.7)
Urgent senior review
and liaison with
respiratory team
and ITU
Yes
No
Moderate severity (2)
High severity ( >3)
Figure 25.1  Management of suspected community-acquired pneumonia (CAP).

<!-- page:206 -->
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
187
Table 25.1  Differential diagnosis of suspected pneumonia.
Disorder
Comment
Cardiovascular disorders
Pulmonary embolism
Risk factor(s) for venous thromboembolism
Sudden-onset shortness of breath
See Chapter 31.
Tricuspid valve endocarditis
IVDU (intravenous drug user) or indwelling venous cannula e.g. for
haemodialysis in blood cultures.
Neoplastic disorders
Bronchial carcinoma
Weight loss, chronic cough, abnormal CXR (nodule or mass, mediastinal
lymphadenopathy).
Alveolar cell carcinoma
Similar CXR appearance to pneumonia. If there is no leucocytosis or fever or if
the patient doesn’t respond to antibiotics.
Immune-mediated disorders
Wegener granulomatosis
Haematuria, haemoptysis, epistaxis, scleritis, uveitis.
Diffuse alveolar haemorrhage
Haematuria, haemoptysis, positive anti-GBM (anti glomerular basement
membrane antibodies), ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) antibodies.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Skin rash, sensitivity to sunlight, positive ANA (antinuclear antibodies).
Acute interstitial pneumonia
Ground glass changes and traction bronchiectasis on HRCT (high resolution CT).
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Peripheral blood eosinophilia, peripheral infiltrate within the outer two-thirds of
the lung fields on CXR, responds to steroids.
Organizing pneumonia
Acute to subacute onset of symptoms, migratory patchy infiltrates on CXR,
responds to steroids.
Other disorders
Drug toxicity (e.g. amiodarone
pneumonitis)
Restrictive spirometry, decreased gas transfer, responds to steroids and stopping
offending drug(s).
Radiation pneumonitis
History of recent radiotherapy, responds to steroids.
Table 25.2  Chest X-ray (CXR) findings in pneumonia.
Element
Comment
Focal
shadowing
Required to make the diagnosis of pneumonia.
Lobar pneumonia is the result of disease that starts in the periphery and spreads from one alveolus
to another. As the disease reaches a fissure, this will result in a sharp delineation, since
consolidation will not cross a fissure. The alveoli that surround the bronchi become denser and the
bronchi become more visible, resulting in an air-bronchogram.
Bronchopneumonia starts in the airways as acute bronchitis. It will lead to multifocal ill-defined
densities. When it progresses it can produce diffuse consolidation.
Pleural effusion
If present, and high suspicion of pleural infection, arrange for ultrasound-guided aspiration of
effusion and send samples for Gram stain and culture, pH and biochemistry (lactate dehydrogenase
[LDH], protein, glucose).
Cavitation
Associated with tuberculosis and Staphylococcus aureus infection, but may also occur in
Gram-negative and anaerobic infections.
Lung abscess
CXR typically demonstrates an air-fluid level, but chest CT is more sensitive and can confirm the
diagnosis in difficult cases. Most patients with lung abscess do well with conservative management
and a prolonged course of antibiotics.
Pneumothorax
May occur in cavitating pneumonia and is particularly associated with Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia (Chapter 28).

<!-- page:207 -->
188
Acute Medicine
Choice of initial antibiotic therapy for CAP
Antibiotic treatment is typically chosen empirically because of the absence of microbiological results upon
diagnosis. The choice of the empirical antibiotic depends on the most likely pathogen, individual risk factors,
comorbidities, allergies and local antimicrobial policy (Table 25.5).
•	 Start antibiotic therapy as soon as diagnosis of CAP is suspected. Antibiotics should not be withheld if there
is a delay in taking blood for culture.
Further management
Oxygen
Humidified O2 should be continued to keep arterial PaO2 > 8.0 kPa (oxygen saturation 88–92% in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and risk of CO2 retention).
Fluid balance
•	 Insensible losses are greater than normal due to fever (allow 500 mL/day/°C fever) and tachypnoea.
•	 Patients with severe pneumonia should receive IV fluids (2–3 L/day), with daily assessment of fluid status and
measurement of renal function. Adequate hydration also helps with expectoration of sputum.
Table 25.3  Urgent investigations in suspected community-acquired pneumonia.
Test
Comment
CXR
See Table 25.2.
Full blood count
Leucocytosis or leucocytopenia are markers of sepsis and severe infection.
Urea &electrolytes
To assess renal function and disease severity (urea >7.0).
C-reactive protein
As biomarker of treatment response.
Liver function tests
The identification of underlying or associated hepatic disease.
Arterial blood gas (ABG)
If oxygen saturations <92% on air, or in patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease COPD to assess for type 2 respiratory failure.
Urine for Legionella
antigen
In those with severe CAP or during an outbreak.
Blood culture
Identification of pathogens and antibiotic sensitivity patterns allows selection of optimal
antibiotic regimens. Blood for culture must be taken prior to starting antibiotics.
‘Atypical’ serology
For patients with severe CAP or unresponsive to beta-lactam antibiotics. ‘Atypical’
pathogens that cause pneumonia are Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae,
Chlamydia psittaci and Coxiella burnetii.
Sputum culture
For patients with CAP who are able to expectorate sputum. Sputum samples should be sent
for Gram stain, culture and sensitivity tests.
HIV test
CAP is considered a HIV indicator condition. Therefore, HIV testing should be offered to all
adults age 65 years or younger with CAP.
Table 25.4  CURB-65 score.
Score 1 point each for:
•	 New Confusion (abbreviated mental test score 8 or less, or new disorientation in person, place or time).
•	 Blood Urea > 7.0 mmol/L.
•	 Respiratory rate ≥ 30 breaths/min.
•	 Low Blood pressure (systolic BP < 90 mmHg or diastolic BP ≤ 60 mmHg).
•	 Age ≥ 65 years.

<!-- page:208 -->
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
189
Antibiotic therapy
•	 Review this after 48 h. If there has been clinical improvement, with a fall in C-reactive protein level, switch
to oral therapy in those patients initially given IV therapy.
•	 Management of patients who fail to improve after 48 h antibiotic therapy is discussed below (see
Problems).
Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
Give prophylaxis with anti-embolism stockings and low-molecular-weight heparin.
Pain relief
Relieve pleuritic chest pain with paracetamol and/or NSAIDs, to facilitate sputum expectoration.
Chest physiotherapy
•	 Chest physiotherapy is helpful if the patient is producing sputum but having difficulty expectorating it, and
in bronchiectasis.
•	 Nebulized hypertonic saline may be helpful when sputum is thick and difficult to expectorate, but tends to
cause a greater degree of bronchoconstriction than normal saline. Give bronchodilator therapy before nebulized hypertonic saline.
Bronchodilator therapy
Nebulized salbutamol or ipratropium should be prescribed to patients with asthma or COPD if there is wheeze
on auscultation.
Table 25.5  Initial empirical treatment regimens for CAP in adults (this is only intended as a guide. You should
prescribe antibiotics according to your local antimicrobial policy).
Severity
Site
Preferred treatment
Penicillin allergy
Low (CURB-65 = 0–1,
mortality <3%)
Home
Amoxicillin 500 mg TDS orally for
5 days.
Doxycycline 200 mg loading dose then
100 mg orally or clarithromycin
500 mg bd orally for 5 days.
Low severity (CURB65 = 0–1, mortality <3%)
but admission indicated
for reasons other than
pneumonia severity
(e.g. social reasons)
Hospital
Amoxicillin 500 mg TDS orally. If oral
administration not possible:
amoxicillin 500 mg TDS IV for 5 days.
Doxycycline 200 mg loading dose then
100 mg od orally or clarithromycin
500 mg bd orally for 5 days.
Moderate severity
(CURB-65 = 2, 3–15%
mortality)
Hospital
Amoxicillin 500 mg−1.0 g TDS orally
plus clarithromycin 500 mg bd orally.
If oral administration not possible:
amoxicillin 500 mg TDS IV plus
clarithromycin 500 mg bd IV.
Doxycycline 200 mg loading dose then
100 mg orally or levofloxacin 500 mg od
orally or moxifloxacin 400 mg od orally.
High severity
(CURB-65 ≥ 3, 15–40%
mortality)
Hospital
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g TDS IV plus
clarithromycin 500 mg bd IV.
Vancomycin 1 g bd IV plus
clarithromycin 500 mg bd IV or
levofloxacin 500 mg bd IV or
Cefuroxime 1.5 g TDS IV or cefotaxime
1 g TDS IV or ceftriaxone 2 g od IV, plus
clarithromycin 500 mg bd IV.

<!-- page:209 -->
190
Acute Medicine
Checklist before discharge
Clinically stable for >24 h:
•	 Normal mental state (or at baseline).
•	 Temperature < 37.5 °C.
•	 Respiratory rate < 24/min.
•	 Arterial oxygen saturation breathing air >92% (>88% if COPD).
•	 Heart rate < 100/min.
•	 Systolic BP >90 mmHg.
•	 Advice on smoking cessation given if needed.
•	 General practitioner follow-up arranged within one week.
•	 Follow-up CXR at six weeks’ time.
Prevention
The main preventable risk for pneumonia is tobacco smoking. In those with comorbidities and elderly, influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations reduce the risk of developing pneumonia.
Problems
Failure to improve after 48 h antibiotic therapy
Address the following points:
•	 Review the clinical, microbiological and radiological findings.
•	 Are you confident the diagnosis is pneumonia (consider the diagnoses in Table 25.1), and that the patient’s
current antibiotic therapy is appropriate for the possible pathogens?
•	 Consider broadening your antibiotic therapy, in case the organism is unusual or resistant: ask advice from
a microbiologist.
•	 Re-examine the patient, and check for signs of metastatic infection, such as septic arthritis or infective
endocarditis.
•	 Repeat the CXR. Are there any new findings such as cavitation or pleural effusion? If there is sufficient pleural effusion for safe pleural aspiration, this should be aspirated and sent for Gram stain and culture. If the
fluid is cloudy rather than mildly turbid, and/or the pleural fluid pH <7.20, liaise with chest physicians to
arrange for urgent chest drain insertion. In an IV drug user or a patient with an indwelling venous cannula
consider tricuspid valve endocarditis with septic pulmonary emboli.
•	 Consider underlying airways or lung disease, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchiectasis,
bronchial carcinoma and inhaled foreign body.
•	 Consider pulmonary tuberculosis in patients with risk factors for TB. Send sputum for Ziehl–Neelsen stain
and liaise with chest physicians for advice. Consider HIV/AIDS. Test for HIV if this has not already been done.
•	 CT or fibreoptic bronchoscopy may be indicated to clarify the diagnosis. Therefore, close liaison with chest
physicians is strongly recommended.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) (Box 25.2) is defined as a lower respiratory tract infection occurring 48 h
or more after admission which was not present at the time of admission OR infection present on admission but
patient is within 10 days of previous in-patient stay. HAP (which includes ventilator-associated pneumonia) is
the second most common cause of infection among hospital inpatients and is the leading cause of death due
to infection, with mortality rates ranging from 20% to 70%.
Consider HAP in a patient with:
•	 New cough productive of purulent sputum or purulent tracheal secretions.
•	 Acute breathlessness.

<!-- page:210 -->
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
191
•	 Increased oxygen requirement/respiratory failure (Chapter 30).
•	 New delirium.
•	 Core temperature >38 or <36 °C.
Severe HAP is defined as one or more of the following features:
•	 Admission to ICU.
•	 New confusion.
•	 Bilateral or multi-lobar consolidation on CXR.
•	 Respiratory rate > 30.
•	 New hypoxia (PO2 < 8 kPa or SaO2 < 92% on any FiO2).
•	 FiO2 > 35% to maintain O2 saturation.
•	 Need for ventilator support (non-invasive or invasive ventilation).
•	 Haemodynamic compromise (systolic BP < 90 mmHg or diastolic BP < 60 mmHg).
Priorities
Make a rapid but systematic assessment using the ABCDE approach (Chapter 2).
Airway: ensure a clear airway (Chapters 1 and 105). If the airway is compromised, seek urgent help from an
anaesthetist.
Breathing: maintain adequate oxygenation. Give supplemental oxygen as needed to maintain oxygen saturation at 94–96% (88–92% if at risk of CO2 retention).
Circulation: maintain adequate cardiac output/systemic blood pressure:
•	 Volume replacement with IV crystalloid if dehydrated.
•	 Correct major arrhythmia (Chapter  13). Rate-control if in atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular rate
(Chapter 13).
•	 While doing this, collect information about the patient, the current problem, the context and comorbidities. Establish what has been decided regarding the ceiling of care and resuscitation status of the
patient.
HAP affects 0.5–1.0% of inpatients and is one of the most common nosocomial infections
contributing to death.
The mortality rate of HAP is between 20 and 70%. It increases hospital stay by 7–9 days.
In immunocompetent patients, HAP is typically caused by bacteria (e.g. Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus) and rarely by viral or fungal
pathogens.
Risk factors for HAP are:
•	 Age > 70
•	 Chronic lung disease
•	 Diabetes
•	 Reduced level of consciousness
•	 Recent chest or abdominal surgery
•	 Mechanical ventilation
•	 Nasogastric feeding
•	 Immunosuppression (e.g. long-term corticosteroid use and chemotherapy).
Box 25.2  Hospital-acquired pneumonia.

<!-- page:211 -->
192
Acute Medicine
Check arterial blood gases, arrange a CXR and record an ECG
See Chapter 30 for the management of respiratory failure. Compare the CXR with the previous CXR, if available. Focal shadowing (Table 25.2) is required to make the diagnosis of pneumonia. Consider the differential
diagnosis (Table 25.1). CT chest may be needed in patients with abnormal CXR.
If the working diagnosis is hospital-acquired pneumonia,
start antibiotic therapy.
The choice of antibiotic therapy is governed by local hospital policy (which takes into account knowledge of
local microbial pathogens). Seek advice from a microbiologist on antibiotic therapy for patients with severe
HAP (Table 25.6).
•	 Aspiration is the misdirection of oropharyngeal or gastric contents into the larynx and lower respiratory tract.
Around 45% of healthy people aspirate during sleep. Aspiration is more common in hospital patients, particularly after a stroke or with a reduced conscious level, when the upper airway becomes colonized with
Gram-negative bacteria. See Table 25.7 for management of aspiration pneumonia
Table 25.6  Initial antibiotic therapy of hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP).
Initial antibiotic therapy*
Severity
of HAP
No penicillin allergy
Penicillin allergy
Non-severe
Oral Co.-amoxiclav 625 mg
8-hourly for 5 days
Doxycycline 200 mg on 1st day, then 100 mg once a day for 4 days OR
Cefalexin 500 mg twice or three times a day for 5 days OR
Levofloxacin (off-label use) 500 mg once or twice a day for 5 days
Severe
Tazocin 4.5 g 8-hourly IV
Ceftazidime 2 g 8-hourly IV (+
vancomycin if MRSA is suspected)
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV once a day
Meropenem 0.5–1 g 8-hourly IV
Levofloxacin 500 mg 12-hourly IV or oral
* This is only intended as a guide. You should prescribe antibiotics according to your local antimicrobial policy
Aspiration pneumonia.
Table 25.7  Aspiration pneumonia management.
Inoculum
Effects on airway
and lungs
Clinical features
Management
Acid
Chemical
pneumonitis
Acute dyspnoea, tachypnoea, possible
cyanosis, bronchospasm, fever, pink frothy
sputum, infiltrates in one or both lower
lobes, hypoxaemia
Positive-pressure breathing,
IV fluids, tracheal suction
Oropharyngeal
bacteria
Bacterial infection
Usually insidious onset; cough, fever,
purulent sputum, infiltrate involving
dependent pulmonary segment or lobe,
with or without cavitation
Antibiotic therapy
(Table 25.6)
Inert fluids
Mechanical
obstruction, reflex
airway closure
Acute dyspnoea, cyanosis, pulmonary
oedema
Tracheal suction, intermittent
positive-pressure breathing
with oxygen, bronchodilator
Particulate
matter
Mechanical
obstruction
Dependent on level of obstruction,
ranging from acute apnoea to chronic
cough with or without recurrent infections
Extraction of particulate
matter, antibiotic therapy

<!-- page:212 -->
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
193
•	 Conditions that predispose to aspiration pneumonia include:
•	 Reduced consciousness, resulting in a compromise of the cough reflex and glottic closure
•	 Dysphagia from neurologic deficits
•	 Disorders of the upper gastrointestinal tract including oesophageal disease, surgery involving the upper
airways or oesophagus and gastric reflux
•	 Mechanical disruption of the glottic closure due to tracheostomy, endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy,
upper GI endoscopy and nasogastric feeding
•	 Protracted vomiting
•	 Large-volume NG tube feedings
•	 Feeding gastrostomy
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is a preventable and curable disease. According to World Health Organization’s ‘Global TB
Report 2023’, TB was the world’s second leading cause of death from a single infectious agent, after COVID-19,
with the reported global number of people newly diagnosed with TB of 7.5 million and an estimated 1.30 million deaths globally in 2022. More than 90% of people who develop the disease are adults and there are more
cases among men than women. There were 4425 cases of TB in United Kingdom in 2021, with males accounting for 60% of the cases. More than half (52.8%) of the notified cases had pulmonary TB. For signs and
symptoms of TB please see Table 25.8
Pathophysiology
It is caused by infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). MTB bacteria can spread through air droplets
from infectious individuals while coughing, sneezing or even speaking. Close contacts (i.e. those with prolonged [>8 h] contact with contagious case) are at the highest risk of becoming infected. For risk factors and
investigations of TB see Tables 25.9 and 25.10, respectively.
Table 25.8  Clinical presentations of pulmonary TB.
•	 Chronic cough
•	 Pyrexia of unknown origin
•	 Haemoptysis (more common with cavitation on CXR, and most will be smear positive)
•	 Systemic symptoms- weight loss, night sweats, lethargy
•	 Unresolved pneumonia
•	 Pleural effusion, usually exudative and lymphocytic
•	 Breathlessness
•	 Asymptomatic
Table 25.9  Risk factors for developing active TB in the United Kingdom.
•	 Alcohol misuse (4.5%)
•	 Drug misuse (5.3%)
•	 Caucasian (30%)
•	 Afro-Caribbean immigrants (10%)
•	 Close contacts of smear positive TB
•	 Indian-subcontinent immigrants (35%)
•	 Homelessness (4.9%)
•	 Overcrowding (e.g. prison, 4.1%)
•	 Cigarette smoking, cannabis
•	 Certain medical factors: chronic renal disease (3.1%), chronic liver disease (1.6%), immunosuppression (6.7%), diabetes
mellitus (11.9%), silicosis, vitamin D deficiency and haematological malignancy (e.g. lymphoma and leukaemia)

<!-- page:213 -->
194
Acute Medicine
Treatment
The treatment objectives are to cure the patient, minimizing the risk of morbidity and mortality associated
with the disease, reduce risk of transmission to others and avert the development of clinically significant
drug resistance. The therapeutic approach to tuberculosis (TB) adheres to a fundamental strategy, comprising an initial intensive phase (phase I) aimed at killing actively growing MTB, followed by a continuation
phase (phase II) focused on the eradication of any residual bacteria. The latest WHO guidelines recommend
a 6-month regimen of isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), ethambutol (E) and pyrazinamide (Z) for people with
drug-susceptible TB, with all four drugs for the first two months (phase I), followed by H and R for the
remaining four months (phase II). Treatment should be started promptly in any patient who is smearpositive, and in those who are smear-negative but with typical CXR changes and no response to standard
antibiotics. It is strongly advised to promptly consult local TB specialists regarding any suspected TB cases
before starting ATT.
It is important to consider the following points when starting someone on ATT:
•	 Never treat with a single drug.
•	 Never add a single drug to failing regime.
•	 Most patients can be managed as outpatients.
•	 All patients should be discussed at local TB MDT. The treatment of all cases of TB must be supervised by a
consultant with appropriate experience.
•	 TB is a notifiable disease under the Public Health Regulations of 1988. All new cases must be notified and
reported to local public health.
•	 All multi-drug-resistant patients should be managed by TB specialists.
•	 Advise patients to stop drugs and contact the TB team if they have persistent vomiting.
•	 All patients should be warned about orange-coloured bodily fluids (urine, tears, saliva) due to rifampicin.
•	 All patients should have their visual acuity and colour vision checked before starting ATT. If they develop
visual disturbance, they should immediately stop ATT and contact the TB team.
Table 25.10  Investigations of suspected pulmonary TB.
CXR
The most useful investigation for the diagnosis of TB. There is a strong predilection for
the upper zones. The CXR findings vary from paratracheal or hilar lymph node
enlargement, to cavitating pneumonia and pleural effusion.
Sputum staining,
microscopy and culture
Required for definitive diagnosis. At least three sputum samples (including at least one
obtained in the early morning) from a spontaneously produced deep cough. Induced
sputum may be used in those unable to expectorate.
Baseline blood tests–FBC,
renal and liver function
tests.
Liver function tests at baseline are helpful before treatment is started as AntiTuberculosis Treatment (ATT) tends to cause hepatotoxicity.
Bronchoscopy
To obtain bronchoalveolar lavage in those with dry cough and high index of clinical
suspicion.
Endobronchial ultrasound
(EBUS)
To obtain lymph node samples in those with dry cough or inconclusive sputum sample
and high index of clinical suspicion.
Nucleic acid amplification
tests (e.g. GeneXpert)
These provide rapid identification of MTB and rifampicin resistance. The sensitivity of
the tests varies depending on the specimen. Testing sputum is more accurate than other
specimens such as pleural fluid or urine.
Interferon gamma release
assays (IGRAs)
Due to their high sensitivity and low specificity, a negative result rules out active or
latent TB, but a positive result cannot distinguish between active and latent TB.
HIV test
Due to close links between HIV and TB and high mortality rate in HIV-positive TB
patients, all patients with TB should be tested for HIV infection.
CT scan
It may show cavitating disease, it also helps to distinguish active from non-active disease,
guide site of BAL and identify any mediastinal lymphadenopathy.

<!-- page:214 -->
Respiratory infection: CAP, HAP and TB
195
•	 For women of childbearing age, give them contraception advice as the efficacy of oral contraceptive pills will
be reduced by rifampicin.
•	 A patient who is infectious and presents risk to others in the community can be admitted to hospital under
court order, but cannot be compulsorily treated.
Complications
Pulmonary TB
•	 Fibrosis
•	 Pneumothorax
•	 Haemoptysis
•	 Aspergilloma
Extra-pulmonary TB
•	 Spinal cord damage
•	 Constrictive pericarditis
•	 Cranial nerve palsy
Common terminologies used in TB
Smear positive TB: indicates the detection of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) on a sputum smear using the
Ziehl-Neelsen stain. These patients are highly infectious, and if a patient is admitted to hospital, isolation
is necessary.
Culture-positive TB: refers to cases where AFB are not observed on the smear (smear-negative), but tuberculosis is confirmed through culture, which may take up to nine weeks. While less contagious than smearpositive disease, there is still a risk of transmission in culture-positive cases.
Multidrug-resistant Tb (MDR-TB): MTB resistant to two or more first-line agents, usually isoniazid and
rifampicin.
Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB): MDR-TB with added resistance to all fluoroquinolones and one of three
injectable anti-TB drugs (e.g. capreomycin and amikacin).
Interferon Gamma Release Assay (IGRA): two blood tests (T-SPOT.TB and QuantiFERON-TB Gold). These tests
detect IFN-γ released by T-cells in response to MTB-specific antigens. Both tests are very sensitive for the
diagnosis of latent TB than the tuberculin skin test. IGRA should not be used to diagnose active TB as it cannot distinguish between active and latent TB.
Latent TB: A positive skin test or IGRA, showing MTB infection but with no signs, symptoms or CXR changes
of active TB. Treatment with chemoprophylaxis reduces the risk of active disease by 90%.
Further reading
Further reading for CAP
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2014) Pneumonia in adults: diagnosis and management.
Clinical guideline (CG191) Last updated: October 2023. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg191.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2019) Pneumonia (community acquired): antimicrobial
prescribing. Available from www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng138.
Prina E, Ranzani OT, Torres A. (2015) Community-acquired pneumonia. Lancet 386, 1097–1108.
Further reading for HAP
Clinical practice guidelines by the infectious diseases Society of America and the American Thoracic Society.
Clin Infect Dis 63, e61–e111.  http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/63/5/e61.long.

<!-- page:215 -->
196
Acute Medicine
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence Guideline (2019) Pneumonia (hospital acquired):
antimicrobial prescribing. Available from ww.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng139.
Further reading TB
WHO The World Health Organization routinely offers updated information on the latest advancements in
tuberculosis. Available from https://www.who.int/health-topics/tuberculosis.
