# CHAPTER 31 Venous thromboembolism

- Pages: 255-267
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:255 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 31
236
Risk factors
(see Table 31.1)
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
History
Consider the diagnosis in any patient presenting with new onset of:
•	 Unilateral calf or leg swelling
•	 Measure the circumference of each leg 10 cm below the tibial tuberosity – a difference of >3 cm increases
the likelihood of a DVT
•	 Calf tenderness
•	 Erythema or warmth of the affected leg
•	 Distended veins
Venous thromboembolism
Eilish Donnelly, Sanna Khawaja, and Roshan Navin
CHAPTER 31
Table 31.1  Risk factors for VTE.
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
History of DVT/PE
Recent major surgery
Active cancer (known or undiagnosed)
Recent hospitalisation
Increasing age
Recent trauma
Obesity
Significant immobility
Male sex
Prolonged travel > 4 h
Inherited thrombophilia,
e.g. Factor V Leiden, antiphospholipid syndrome
Pregnancy/postpartum period
Acquired thrombophilia,
e.g. Behcet’s, nephrotic syndrome
Hormonal treatment,
e.g. HRT/COCP
Myeloproliferative disorders
Chemotherapy
Inflammatory disorders,
e.g. IBD, autoimmune disease
Smoker
Varicose veins
Dehydration

<!-- page:256 -->
Venous thromboembolism
237
Assessment
If deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is suspected, calculate a two-level DVT Wells’ Score (Table 31.2) to assess the
probability.
Wells’ score ≤1
Check plasma D-dimer.
•	 If D-dimer is negative, DVT is effectively excluded.
	 Pursue other diagnoses (Table 31.3).
•	 If D-dimer is positive, request a duplex scan of the proximal leg veins (if this is not possible within 4 h, begin
interim therapeutic anticoagulation, pending the result of the scan).
Wells’ score ≥2
Go straight to requesting a duplex scan of the proximal leg veins (if this is not possible within 4 h, begin interim
therapeutic anticoagulation, pending the result of the scan).
•	 If the scan is positive for DVT, start anticoagulation.
•	 If the scan is negative for DVT:
•	 If D-dimer negative, DVT is effectively excluded. Pursue other diagnoses (Table 31.3).
•	 If D-dimer positive, stop interim therapeutic anticoagulation and repeat the duplex scan six to eight days
later in patients to confirm no DVT.
For a confirmed venous thromboembolism (VTE), patients will require anticoagulation for at least
three months.
For detailed pharmacological treatment of confirmed VTE please refer to Chapter 85.
Consider catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy for DVT patients with symptomatic iliofemoral DVT who
have symptoms <14 days, good functional status, life expectancy >1 year and a low risk of bleeding.
Refer as an outpatient for thrombosis follow-up for investigation of secondary causes and sequelae, as well
as appropriate two-week wait pathway if cancer is suspected.
Table 31.2  Wells’ score for DVT.
Clinical feature
Points
Active cancer (treatment ongoing, within six months, or palliative)
1
Paralysis, paresis or recent plaster immobilisation of the lower extremities
1
Recently bedridden for 3 days or more or major surgery within 12 weeks requiring general or
regional anaesthesia
1
Localised tenderness along the distribution of the deep venous system
1
Entire leg swollen
1
Calf swelling at least 3 cm larger than asymptomatic side
1
Pitting oedema confined to the symptomatic leg
1
Collateral superficial veins (non-varicose)
1
Previously documented DVT
1
An alternative diagnosis is at least as likely as DVT
−2
Clinical probability simplified score
DVT likely
2 points or more
DVT unlikely
1 point or less
* Wells et al. (2003)/with permission of Elsevier.

<!-- page:257 -->
238
Acute Medicine
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
History
Consider the diagnosis in any patient presenting with:
•	 Acute breathlessness, or worsening of chronic breathlessness (e.g. in COPD/CCF)
•	 Chest pain (which may be non-pleuritic or pleuritic)
•	 Haemoptysis
•	 Pre-syncope or syncope (especially in combination with breathlessness, or with risk factors for venous
thromboembolism)
•	 Shock or hypotension
40% of patients with a PE have no identified predisposing factors.
<25% of patients with a symptomatic PE have clinical evidence of a DVT.
Assessment
Review the physiological observations, make a focused clinical assessment and perform blood tests as indicated. Obtain an electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest X-ray. These can also help reveal or exclude alternative
diagnoses (e.g. myocardial infarction, pneumonia and pneumothorax).
In PE, the ECG may be normal, or show sinus tachycardia. It may also show changes associated with right
ventricular strain (right axis deviation, partial or complete right bundle branch block, t-wave inversion in V1–4
or S1Q3T3 pattern).
The chest X-ray may be normal or show non-specific abnormalities.
If PE is suspected, a pre-test prediction of PE probability should be performed using the Wells’ score (see
Table 31.4 and Figure 31.1).
If Wells’ score ≤4
Request a D-dimer. If the D-dimer is negative, PE is effectively excluded and no further investigation for PE is
required. If D-dimer is positive, proceed to specific imaging (see below).
If Wells’ score >4
Proceed straight to specific imaging. Do not request a D-dimer as a normal result does not exclude a PE.
If imaging cannot be obtained within 4 h, then offer interim therapeutic anticoagulation.
Table 31.3  Causes of leg swelling.
Venous/Lymphatic
Skin
Deep vein thrombosis
Superficial thrombophlebitis
IVC obstruction (e.g. by a tumour)
Varicose veins with chronic venous hypertension
Post-phlebitic syndrome
Congenital lymphoedema
After vein harvesting for coronary bypass grafting
Dependent oedema (e.g. in a paralysed limb)
Severe obesity with compression of ilio-femoral veins
Cellulitis (often presents with tenderness, erythema and
induration of the skin)
SYSTEMIC (oedema is bilateral, but may be asymmetric)
Heart failure
Liver failure
Acute kidney injury/chronic kidney disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Hypoalbuminaemia
Chronic respiratory failure
Pregnancy
Idiopathic oedema of women
Dihydropyridine calcium antagonists
Drugs causing salt/water retention
Musculoskeletal
Calf haematoma
Ruptured Baker’s cyst
Muscle tear

<!-- page:258 -->
Venous thromboembolism
239
Suspected PE with shock or hypotension
CT angiography immediately available
Noa
Echocardiography
Yes
Noa
Yes
CT angiography
Positive
Negative
CT angiography
available
and
patient stabilised
Search for other causes
of haemodynamic instability
CT = computed tomographic, PE = pulmonary embolism; RV = right ventricle.
aIncludes the cases in which the patient's condition is so critical that is only allows bedside diagnostic tests.
bApart from the diagnosis of RV dysfunction, bedside transthoracic echocardiography may in some cases, directly conﬁrm PE
by visualizing mobile thrombus in the right heart chamber. Ancillary bedside imaging tests include transoesophageal
echocardiography, which may detect emboli in the pulmonary artery and its main branches, and biateral compression venous
ultrasonography, which may conﬁrm deep vein thrombosis and thus be of help in emergency management decisions.
CThrombolysis, alternatively, surgical embolectomy or catheter-directed treatment (Section 5).
PE-speciﬁc treatment:
primary reperfusionc
Search for other causes of
haemodynamic instability
No other test availableb
or patient unstable
RV overloadb
Figure 31.1  Suspected pulmonary embolism without shock or hypotension. Source: Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A,
Agnelli G et al. (2014) 2014 ESC Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism. Eur
Heart J 35, 3033–3080. Reproduced with permission of Oxford University Press.
Table 31.4  Modified Wells’ score for PE.
Variable
Points
Clinical signs and symptoms of DVT
3
An alternate diagnosis is less likely than PE
3
Heart rate >100
1.5
Immobilisation or surgery in the previous four weeks
1.5
Previous DVT/PE
1.5
Haemoptysis
1
Malignancy (treatment currently, in the previous six months or palliative)
1
Risk group
Points required
Risk of PE
Low
0–4
5.1%
High
>4
39.1%

<!-- page:259 -->
240
Acute Medicine
D-dimer testing
The commonly used D-dimer assays have high sensitivity (95%) but only low specificity (50%) for VTE. Other
causes of a raised plasma D-dimer include renal failure, aortic dissection, infection and malignancy.
Plasma D-dimer levels increase with age. The 2019 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines recommend using age-adjusted cut-off values (follow local guidance).
A negative D-dimer test in a patient with a Wells’ score of ≤4 makes PE highly unlikely (0.14–0.5% probability); the negative predictive value of this combination is at least 99.5% and comparable to CT pulmonary
angiography. Pursue other diagnoses.
Imaging
CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA)
CTPA has the advantage of providing valuable additional information on lung parenchyma, aorta, mediastinum, pleural spaces, bones and chest wall, and can reveal alternative diagnoses if PE is excluded. However, it
carries higher radiation exposure than a V/Q scan (below).
Ventilation-perfusion imaging with single photon emission computed
tomography (V/Q SPECT)
A V/Q scan is a nuclear medicine scan. It can be used in patients deemed low risk if the chest X-ray is normal and there
is no underlying respiratory disease. It may be preferable to CTPA in renal failure or previous contrast reaction.
If investigations are negative for VTE, pursue other diagnoses. If positive, start anticoagulation (see below).
Management of confirmed VTE
Risk stratification
The classification of the severity of acute PE (into low, medium and high-risk categories) is based on the clinical
status at presentation (Table 31.5 and Figure 31.1), which determines management.
Table 31.5  Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index (PESI) score.
Predictors
Points
Age
+1 per year
Male sex
+10
Heart failure
+10
Chronic lung disease
+10
Temperature <36 °C
+20
Arterial oxygen saturation <90%
+20
Respiratory rate >30/min
+20
Pulse rate >110/min
+20
Systolic BP <100 mmHg
+30
Active cancer
+30
Altered mental status
+60
PESI score (total number of points)
Risk class
30-day mortality rate (%)
<65
I
0–1.6
66–85
II
1.7–3.5
86–105
III
3.2–7.1
106–125
IV
4.0–11.4
>125
V
10.0–24.5

<!-- page:260 -->
Venous thromboembolism
241
The Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index (PESI) score is commonly used as a validated clinical risk score to
calculate overall mortality risk.
Low risk
PESI class I/II patients are deemed low risk if there are no known radiological or biochemical features of right
heart dysfunction (Table 31.6). These patients may be considered for discharge and management in an ambulatory setting depending on local protocol.
The treatment of low-risk PE and DVT is with anticoagulation. Similar regimes are usually followed for both.
Refer to local guidance for choice of agent.
Direct oral anticoagulants (e.g. rivaroxaban and apixaban) are direct Factor Xa inhibitors, and are first-line
treatment unless contraindicated.
Table 31.6  2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism developed in
collaboration with the European Respiratory Society (ERS) / Oxford University Press.
Early mortality risk
Indicators of risk
Haemodynamic
instabilitya
Clinical
parameters of PE
severity and/or
comorbidity:PESI
class III–V or sPESI
≥1
RV
dysfunction on
TTE or CTPAb
Elevated cardiac
troponin levelsc
High
+
(+)d
+
(+)
Intermediate
Intermediate–high
–+e
+
+
Intermediate–low
–+e
One (or none) positive
Low
–––Assessment
optional;
if assessed, negative
BP = blood pressure; CTPA = computed tomography pulmonary angiography; H-FABP = heart-type fatty acid-binding
protein; NT-proBNP = N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide; PE = pulmonary embolism; PESI = Pulmonary Embolism
Severity Index; RV = right ventricular; sPESI = simplified Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index; TTE = transthoracic
echocardiogram.
a One of the following clinical presentations (Table 4): cardiac arrest, obstructive shock (systolic BP <90 mmHg or
vasopressors required to achieve a BP ≥90 mmHg despite an adequate filling status, in combination with end-organ
hypoperfusion), or persistent hypotension (systolic BP <90 mmHg or a systolic BP drop ≥40 mmHg for >15 min, not
caused by new-onset arrhythmia, hypovolemia, or sepsis).
b Prognostically relevant imaging (TTE or CTPA) findings in patients with acute PE, and the corresponding cut-off levels,
are graphically presented in Figure 3, and their prognostic value is summarized in Supplementary Data Table 3.
c Elevation of further laboratory biomarkers, such as NT-proBNP ≥600 ng/L, H-FABP ≥6 ng/mL, or copeptin ≥24 pmol/L,
may provide additional prognostic information. These markers have been validated in cohort studies but they have not
yet been used to guide treatment decisions in randomized controlled trials.
d Haemodynamic instability, combined with PE confirmation on CTPA and/or evidence of RV dysfunction on TTE, is
sufficient to classify a patient into the high-risk PE category. In these cases, neither calculation of the PESI nor
measurement of troponins or other cardiac biomarkers is necessary.
e Signs of RV dysfunction on TTE (or CTPA) or elevated cardiac biomarker levels may be present, despite a calculated PESI
of I–II or an sPESI of 0. Until the implications of such discrepancies for the management of PE are fully understood, these
patients should be classified into the intermediate-risk category.

<!-- page:261 -->
242
Acute Medicine
Alternatives can include low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH), unfractionated heparin (UFH) or warfarin
(e.g. in pro-thrombotic conditions such as antiphospholipid syndrome).
The indications/contraindications of anticoagulation are discussed in detail in Chapter 85.
Refer to outpatient thrombosis clinic for investigation of secondary causes if appropriate, determination of
treatment duration and long-term management.
Intermediate risk
Intermediate-risk patients should be admitted for observation and further work-up.
Subcutaneous LMWH is the treatment of choice (unless contraindicated) while ongoing risk is being
determined.
Troponin, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), and inpatient echocardiography help further risk stratification as
per ESC guidelines (Table 31.6).
If the patient falls into the intermediate-low risk category, and/or their monitored condition remains stable,
the patient may be considered suitable for switch to oral agent if appropriate and discharge for ongoing
ambulatory/outpatient management as above, following senior review.
If the patient’s clinical condition deteriorates or fails to stabilise, they may fulfil criteria for escalation of treatment as a high-risk patient (see below).
High risk (haemodynamically unstable)
High-risk PE is defined by the presence of shock or refractory hypotension.
If a patient is haemodynamically unstable (systolic BP < 90) and PE suspected, bedside echocardiography or
emergency CTPA (depending on availability) is recommended to confirm diagnosis.
Right ventricular failure due to acute pressure overload is thought to be the primary cause of death in
severe PE.
Systemic thrombolysis should be considered in:
•	 Refractory hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mmHg for >30–60 min, or a drop of ≥40 mmHg for >15 min), not
due to other causes, e.g. hypovolaemia, sepsis or new arrhythmia.
•	 Selected normotensive patients with clinical evidence of ongoing/worsening instability (intermediate-high
risk) characterized by:
•	 Significant right ventricular (RV) dysfunction (RV dilatation on echo, raised plasma BNP/raised troponin)
•	 Worsening hypoxaemia and respiratory insufficiency
•	 Extreme tachycardia
•	 High clot burden
•	 Deterioration or failure to improve on anticoagulation
A specialist multidisciplinary team approach to decision-making, on a case-by-case basis, in the intermediatehigh risk cohort of patients is recommended.
Contraindications to thrombolysis are listed in Table 31.7.
It is important to consider that some ‘absolute’ contraindications to thrombolysis can become ‘relative’ in
the context of an immediately life-threatening PE.
Thrombolytic agents
Systemic thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is most effective if initiated within 48 h of onset
of symptoms.
Alteplase is the tPA approved for systemic thrombolysis in acute PE in the United Kingdom (Table 31.8).
Other agents are available. Follow local guidance.
These patients will usually be managed in a high dependency unit (HDU) or intensive care unit (ICU)
environment.

<!-- page:262 -->
Venous thromboembolism
243
Consider ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation), where available, in patients with persistent shock,
or severe respiratory failure despite optimal mechanical ventilation.
Endovascular interventions
•	 Catheter-directed thrombolysis /thrombus fragmentation, mechanical or surgical thrombectomy can all be
considered for patients in whom thrombolysis is contraindicated, or who are at high risk of deterioration.
•	 UFH infusion can be used as a bridging measure whilst awaiting endovascular intervention.
PE management in cardiac arrest
PE is a differential diagnosis for a cardiac arrest with a non-shockable rhythm.
If the diagnosis is not confirmed, consider the following surrogates to help make the decision (Figure 31.2):
•	 History suggestive of PE
•	 VTE risk factors
•	 Bedside echocardiogram confirming RV enlargement or strain
Management
•	 Continue as per Advanced Life Support (ALS) algorithm
•	 Perform bedside echocardiography if immediately available
•	 The decision to treat for acute PE must be taken early to be most effective
•	 Administer systemic thrombolysis as detailed above
Table 31.7  Thrombolytic therapy: contraindications.
Absolute
Active internal bleeding
Suspected aortic dissection
Prolonged or traumatic cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Recent head trauma or known intracranial neoplasm
Trauma or surgery within the previous two weeks, which could be a source of rebleeding
Diabetic haemorrhagic retinopathy or other haemorrhagic ophthalmic condition
Pregnancy
Recorded blood pressure >200/120 mmHg
History of cerebrovascular accident known to be haemorrhagic
Relative
Recent trauma or surgery (>2 weeks)
History of chronic severe hypertension with or without drug therapy
Active peptic ulcer
History of cerebrovascular accident
Known bleeding diathesis or current use of anticoagulants
Significant liver dysfunction
If there are one or more relative contraindications to thrombolytic therapy, you must weigh the risks and benefits of
therapy for the individual before deciding whether or not it should be given
Table 31.8  Thrombolysis regimen using alteplase.
Drug
Regimen
rtPA (alteplase)
10 mg of IV alteplase as a bolus over two minutes
Then give 1.5 mg/kg over two hours (to a maximum of 90 mg)
Followed by unfractionated heparin infusion

<!-- page:263 -->
244
Acute Medicine
•	 Once a thrombolytic drug is administered, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) must be continued for
60–90 minutes and the patient should be managed in ICU
•	 Consider VA (veno-arterial) ECMO, where available, in patients with persistent shock or refractory cardiac
arrest despite initiation of thrombolysis
VTE in pregnancy
VTE is one of the leading direct causes of maternal death in the United Kingdom, and should be suspected in
patients who are pregnant or <6 weeks postpartum.
If the history or clinical examination is suggestive of VTE, proceed as below.
If clinical concern for PE, a chest X-ray should be performed.
ESC guidelines continue to recommend D-dimer testing in low probability (Wells’ score < 4) cases. However,
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) guidelines have moved away from using D-dimer
and pre-test probability scores in pregnant patients. Follow local guidance.
Compression proximal duplex ultrasound is the initial specific imaging of choice. A positive test for DVT will
eliminate the need for any further thoracic imaging/radiation exposure if the patient is in the low-risk treatment category for PE, as treatment will be similar for both.
Suspected PE without shock or hypotension
No treatmentb
Treatmentb
No treatmentb or
investigate furtherd
Treatmentb
Assess clinical probability of PE
Clinical judgment or prediction rulea
Low/intermediate clinical
probability or PE unlikely
D-dimer
Positive
No PE
PE conﬁrmedc
CT angiography
Negative
High clinical probability
or PE likely
CT angiography
No PE
PE conﬁrmedc
CT = computed tomographic, PE = pulmonary embolism.
aTwo alternative classiﬁcation schemes may be used for clinical probability assessment, i.e. a three-level scheme (clinical
probability deﬁned as low, intermediate, or high) or a two-level scheme (PE unlikely or PE likely). When using a moderately
sensitive assay. D-dimer measurement should be restricted to patients with low clinical probability or a PE-unlikely classiﬁcation,
while highly sensitive assays may also be used in patients which intermediate clinical probability of PE. Note that plasma D-dimer
measurement is of limited use in suspected PE occurring in hospitalized patients.
bTreatment refers to anticoagulation treatment for PE.
cCT angiogram is considered to be diagnostic of PE if it shows PE at the segmental or more proximal level.
dIn case of a negative CT angiogram in patients with high clinical probability, further investigation may be considered before
withholding PE-speciﬁc treatment.
Figure 31.2  Suspected pulmonary embolism with shock or hypotension. Source: Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A,
Agnelli G et al. (2014) 2014 ESC Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism.
Eur Heart J 35, 3033–3080. Reproduced with permission of Oxford University Press.

<!-- page:264 -->
Venous thromboembolism
245
If ultrasound is negative for DVT, but PE still suspected, proceed to specific further diagnostic imaging
(V/Q or CTPA). The modality of choice will depend on local availability and protocols.
Although extremely low baseline risk, VQ SPECT may carry a very slightly increased risk of childhood cancer
(1/280,000 versus less than 1/1,000,000). CTPA is associated with a higher risk of maternal breast cancer
(lifetime risk increased by up to 13.6%, background risk of 1/200 for the study population); in both situations,
the absolute risk is very small. Where feasible, women should be involved in the decision to undergo CTPA or
VQ SPECT.
The risk of undiagnosed maternal PE to a mother and her foetus far outweighs any risk from radiation exposure through diagnostic imaging.
Pregnant patients with a confirmed VTE should be treated with LMWH and referred to a multidisciplinary
service for managing PE in pregnancy.
High-risk patients should have escalation of treatment considered as per the non-pregnant patient (see
above), and also be assessed by a consultant obstetrician.
Long term sequelae
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH)
CTEPH is the most serious long-term sequelae of PE and affects 2–4% of PE survivors.
Patients may present months or years after the initial acute presentation with PE.
Common presenting symptoms are:
•	 Dyspnoea (99%)
•	 Oedema (41%)
•	 Fatigue (32%)
Signs of right heart failure occur in advanced disease stages.
If CTEPH is suspected, refer for further investigations which may include echocardiogram, V/Q or CTPA and
possibly right heart catheterisation.
Further reading
Konstantinides SV, Meyer G, Becattini C, et al. (2019) ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
acute pulmonary embolism developed in collaboration with the European Respiratory Society (ERS). Eur
Heart J 2020(41), 543–603.
Howard LSGE, Barden S, Condliffe R, et al. (2018) British Thoracic Society Guideline for the initial outpatient
management of pulmonary embolism (PE). Thorax 73, ii1–ii29.
NICE guideline [NG158]. Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia
testing. Published: 26 March 2020; Last updated: 2 August 2023.
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (2015). Thromboembolic disease in pregnancy and the
puerperium: acute management. Green-top Guideline No. 37b.

<!-- page:266 -->
Gastroenterology and Hepatology
SECTION 4
