# CHAPTER 34 Diarrhoea

- Pages: 278-283
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:278 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
259
Definition
Diarrhoea is the passage of loose or liquid stools (types 5, 6 or 7 (entirely liquid) on the Bristol Stool Chart). Severe
diarrhoea is the passage of four or more loose or liquid stools daily.
Acute diarrhoea is ≤14 days, persistent diarrhoea 15–30 days, and chronic diarrhoea >30 days in duration.
Acute diarrhoea is usually due to intestinal infection or an adverse effect of medication. All unexplained
cases of diarrhoea should be regarded as potentially infectious, although both infective and noninfective agents can cause both diarrhoea and vomiting. Clostridium difficile followed by norovirus infection are the main causes of fatal illness and should always be considered in hospitalized patients. Norovirus
is the commonest cause overall (around 20% of all cases). The commonest bacterial causes are due to
Salmonella and Campylobacter or E. coli. Inflammatory bowel disease should be excluded if there is bloody
diarrhoea (see Chapters 39 and 40). An overview of the management of acute diarrhoea is outlined in
Figure 34.1.
Priorities
Establish the differential diagnosis from the history and examination (Table  34.1). Strict infection control
protocols must be followed (including barrier nursing and hand-washing). Investigations needed urgently are
given in Table 34.2.
•	 Features of community-acquired infective diarrhoea are given in Table 34.3 and hospital-acquired diarrhoea
in Table 34.4.
•	 Particular causes to consider in the returning traveller are summarized in Table 34.5, and those in patients
with HIV/ADS or immunosuppression in Table 34.6.
If the patient is severely ill (impaired consciousness level, severe volume depletion, marked abdominal
distension or tenderness):
•	 Start vigorous fluid resuscitation with crystalloid, initially via a peripheral IV line, and correct electrolyte
abnormalities.
•	 Start antibiotic therapy according to your local antimicrobial guidelines. On possible regimen is ciprofloxacin
400 mg 12-hourly IV and metronidazole 500 mg 8-hourly IV (immunocompetent patients) or gentamicin
5 mg/kg IV (immunosuppressed patients).
Diarrhoea
Simon Anderson
CHAPTER 34

<!-- page:279 -->
260
Acute Medicine
Table 34.1  Focused assessment of the patient with acute diarrhoea.
History
Mode of onset (abrupt, sub-acute or gradual) and duration.
Frequency and nature of the stools (watery or containing blood and mucus). Bloody stools are a common feature of
shigellosis, salmonellosis, severe Campylobacter enteritis and ulcerative colitis, and are rare (5%) in C. difficile infection.
Have others in the same household or who have shared the same food also developed diarrhoea?
Other symptoms (malaise, fever, vomiting and abdominal pain)?
Current or recent hospital inpatient (at risk of C. difficile infection)?
Travel abroad in the past six months?
Previous significant gastro-intestinal symptoms or known GI diagnosis?
Medications (in particular antibiotics) taken in the six weeks before the onset of diarrhoea?
Any other medical problems?
HIV/AIDS or other immunosuppression? (Table 34.6)
Examination
Severity of illness and degree of volume depletion (mental state, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure lying
and sitting).
Signs of toxic megacolon (marked abdominal distension and tenderness)? (May complicate many forms of infective
colitis (including C. difficile) as well as colitis due to inflammatory bowel disease.)
Extra-abdominal features (e.g. rash, arthropathy and uveitis)?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Acute diarrhoea
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment (Table 34.1)
Urgent investigation (Table 34.2)
Reduced conscious level?
Severe volume depletion?
Marked abdominal distension/tenderness?
Fluid resuscitation
Correct hypokalaemia
Consider cause
(Tables 34.3–6)
Start ciproﬂoxacin
+ metronidazole IV
Abdominal X-ray to exclude
toxic megacolon
Urgent gastroenterology
microbiology opinions
Severe diarrhoea
(four or more loose or
liquid stools daily);
infective cause likely?
Start antimicrobial
therapy against
likely pathogen
(Tables 34.3–6)
Await investigation
results
Supportive care
Figure 34.1  Management of acute diarrhoea.

<!-- page:280 -->
Diarrhoea
261
•	 Obtain an abdominal X-ray to check for segmental or total colonic distension indicative of toxic
megacolon.
•	 Seek urgent help from a microbiologist.
•	 Nurse the patient with standard isolation technique in a single room until the diagnosis is established.
All other patients:
•	 Further management will be determined by the results of microscopy and culture of the stool, and other
investigations.
Table 34.2  Urgent investigation in acute severe diarrhoea.
Stool microscopy and culture
Test for Clostridium difficile toxin in stool
Full blood count
C-reactive protein
Blood glucose
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests, albumin
Blood culture if febrile
Sigmoidoscopy if bloody diarrhoea
Abdominal X-ray if marked distension or tenderness (toxic megacolon)
Table 34.3  Causes of community-acquired diarrhoea.
Cause
Clinical features
Diagnosis/treatment
(if indicated)
Campylobacter
enteritis (C. jejuni)
Incubation period two to six days. Associated
fever and abdominal pain. Diarrhoea initially
watery, later may contain blood and mucus.
Usually, self-limiting, lasting two to five days.
May be followed after one to three weeks by
Guillain-Barré syndrome (Chapter 59)
Culture of C. jejuni from stool.
Azithromycin 500 mg od PO for
five days or Erythromycin 500 mg
12-hourly PO for five days.
Non-typhoid
salmonellosis
(Salmonella species)
Incubation period one to two days. Associated
fever, vomiting and abdominal pain. Diarrhoea
may become bloody if colon involved. Usually
self-limiting. More severe in immunosuppressed.
Culture of Salmonella species
from stool. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg
12-hourly PO for five days or
trimethoprim 200 mg 12-hourly
PO for five days.
Escherichia
coli O157:H7
(enterohaemorrhagic
E. coli)
Incubation period one to three days. Associated
vomiting and abdominal pain. May have
low-grade fever. Watery diarrhoea which
may become bloody. May be complicated by
haemolytic uraemic syndrome from 2 to 14
(mean 7) days after onset of illness.
Culture of E. coli O157 from stool
(using sorbitol MacConkey agar;
missed by standard culture).
Supportive treatment. Antibiotic
therapy unhelpful.
Clostridium difficile
colitis
Typically causes diarrhoea in hospital, often after
antibiotic use but may also occur in the
community. See Table 34.4.
Stool C difficile PCR and toxin
EIA positive.
Treat according to local guidelines.
Norovirus
Usually short incubation time (one to two days).
Diarrhoea with vomiting is typical, with fever
less common. Infections during outbreaks are
more severe, with the elderly at particular risk of
excess mortality.
The diagnosis is made by PCR
analysis of stool and vomitus and
the exclusion of other causes.
Treatment is supportive.

<!-- page:281 -->
262
Acute Medicine
Table 34.5  Causes of acute diarrhoea following recent travel abroad.
Cause
Clinical features
Diagnosis/treatment
Giardiasis
(Giardia lamblia)
Widespread distribution. Explosive
onset of watery diarrhoea one to
three weeks after exposure.
Identification of cysts or trophozoites in stool or
jejunal biopsy.
Amoebic dysentery
(Entamoeba histolytica)
Mexico, South America, South Asia,
West and South-East Africa. Diarrhoea
may be severe with blood and mucus.
Metronidazole 400 mg 8-hourly PO for five days.
Identification of cysts in stools. Metronidazole
750 mg 8-hourly PO for five days.
Schistosomiasis
(S. mansoni and
japonicum)
S. mansoni: South America and
Middle East; S. japonicum: China and
the Philippines. Diarrhoea onset two
to six weeks or longer after exposure.
Identification of ova in stool. Praziquantel
(seek expert advice).
Shigellosis
(Shigella species)
Incubation period one to two days.
Associated fever and abdominal pain.
Diarrhoea may be watery or bloody.
Culture of Shigella species from stool.
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg 12-hourly PO for five days or
Trimethoprim 200 mg 12-hourly PO for five days.
Non-typhoid
salmonellosis
See Community-acquired diarrhoea,
Table 34.3.
Table 34.4  Causes of hospital-acquired diarrhoea.
Cause
Clinical features
Diagnosis/treatment
Clostridium
difficile
colitis
Diarrhoea usually begins within 4–10 days
of antibiotic treatment, but may not
appear for four to six weeks.
Presentations range from mild self-limiting
watery diarrhoea to (rarely) acute
fulminating toxic megacolon.
Low-grade fever and abdominal
tenderness are common.
Although the rectum and sigmoid colon
are usually involved, in 10% of cases colitis
is confined to the more proximal colon.
Diagnosis is based on PCR testing and detection of
C. difficile toxins A and B in the stool. In severe
colitis, sigmoidoscopy may show adherent yellow
plaques (2–10 mm in diameter). Supportive
treatment and isolation of the patient to reduce the
risk of spread.
Stop antibiotic therapy and proton pump inhibitors
if possible. If diarrhoea is mild (one to two stools
daily), symptoms may resolve within one to two
weeks without further treatment. Refer to local
treatment guidelines. In general, if moderate
diarrhoea (three or more stools daily), give
Fidaxomicin 200 mg twice a day PO for 10 days.
If severe infection (usually associated with
hypoalbuminemia and/or ileus), give metronidazole
500 mg 3 times a day IV plus vancomycin 500 mg
4 times a day PO for 10–14 days (IV vancomycin
should not be used as significant excretion into the
gut does not occur).
Around 20% of patients will have a relapse after
initial treatment, due to germination of residual
spores within the colon, re-infection with C. difficile
or further antibiotic treatment. A second course of
the same initial treatment is recommended.
Drugs
Many drugs may cause diarrhoea,
including chemotherapeutic agents,
proton pump inhibitors, metformin and
laxatives in excess.
Diarrhoea resolves after treatment completed or
with withdrawal of the causative drug.
Norovirus
See Table 34.3.
See Table 34.3.

<!-- page:282 -->
Diarrhoea
263
•	 If the patient has a fever, is dehydrated or is immunocompromised, start azithromycin 500 mg OD PO or
ciprofloxacin PO or IV whilst awaiting the stool test results. The choice will depend upon your local antibiotic
guidelines. (Campylobacter is currently the most common bacterial cause and most strains are resistant to
ciprofloxacin. Moreover azithromycin-resistant Shigella infections are common in certain high-risk patients.)
•	 Anti-motility drugs such as loperamide are best avoided but can be given for short-term symptomatic relief.
They are absolutely contraindicated in patients with shigellosis or dysentery (bloody stools and fever) due to
the risk of a toxic megacolon.
Further management
This is directed by the working diagnosis.
Always consider the possibility of C. difficile infection and norovirus  – involve the Infectious Diseases
team early.
A flexible sigmoidoscopy and biopsies are not routinely needed, but if a new presentation of IBD is a
possibility, a gastroenterology opinion should be sought (see below).
Could this be inflammatory bowel disease?
•	 This should be considered if there is blood or if the diarrhoea is chronic or recurrent or if there are systemic
signs (e.g. rash, arthropathy and uveitis).
•	 Ulcerative colitis may present with acute diarrhoea, usually bloody. Vomiting does not occur, and abdominal
pain is not a prominent feature. Diagnosis is by exclusion of infective causes (particularly C. difficile) and
typical histological appearances on rectosigmoid biopsies.
•	 Crohn’s disease is associated with less severe diarrhoea and blood is not prominent but there may be
abdominal pain and tenderness particularly in the lower right quadrant.
•	 See Chapter 40 for further management of inflammatory bowel disease.
Could this be faecal impaction with overflow?
•	 This should be suspected in patients at risk of faecal impaction, for example the elderly, bed-bound, in those
taking opioid analgesics.
Table 34.6  Acute diarrhoea in the immunosuppressed/HIV-positive patient: specific pathogens to consider.
Cause
Clinical features
Diagnosis/treatment
Cryptosporidiosis
(Cryptosporidium species)
Subacute onset
Associated abdominal pain Severe
diarrhoea
Identification of oocysts in stool
Seek expert advice on treatment
Isosporiasis (Isospora belli)
Incubation period: one week
Associated fever, abdominal pain,
diarrhoea with fatty stools
Identification of oocysts in stool, duodenal
aspirate or jejunal biopsy Seek expert
advice on treatment
Cytomegalovirus
Diarrhoea may be accompanied by
fever, systemic illness and hepatitis
Serological tests for cytomegalovirus Seek
expert advice on treatment

<!-- page:283 -->
264
Acute Medicine
•	 There is no vomiting or systemic illness. Rectal examination discloses hard-impacted faeces.
•	 Treatment is with laxatives/enemas.
Further reading
Guery B, Galperine T, Barbut F. (2019) Clostridioides difficile: diagnosis and treatments. BMJ 20(366), l4609.
Riddle MS, DuPont HL, Connor BA. (2016) ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
acute diarrheal infections in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 111(5), 602–622.
