# CHAPTER 35 Jaundice

- Pages: 284-286
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:284 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
265
Jaundice can be caused by a number of different pathologies, which can be sub-divided into pre-hepatic
(excessive red cell breakdown), intra-hepatic (hepatocellular dysfunction) and post-hepatic (impaired hepatic
excretion or obstruction of the biliary tree) (see Table 35.1).
Priorities
As with any clinical presentation, the aetiology is usually elicited by a detailed history (Table  35.2) and
arranging appropriate investigations (Table 35.3).
•	 Look for signs of sepsis
•	 Give IV crystalloid, take blood (and ascitic fluid, if present) for culture, and start empirical IV antibiotic therapy
to cover Gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria, in accordance with local guidelines (e.g. piperacillintazobactam or meropenem). Further management of sepsis is described in Chapter 5.
•	 Assess for hepatic encephalopathy
•	 The combination of jaundice and encephalopathy is characteristic of acute liver failure, but is also seen
in other disorders (Table 35.3). If you suspect acute liver failure, seek urgent advice from a hepatologist.
See Chapter 42 for further management of acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease.
Jaundice
Ben Warner and Lynn Affarah
CHAPTER 35
Table 35.1  Causes of jaundice.
Pre-hepatic
Intra-hepatic
Post-hepatic
Haemolysis
Gilbert’s syndrome
Crigger-Najjar syndrome
Drugs: Rifampicin, contrast
agents and some anti-malarials
Viruses: hepatitis, EBV
Alcoholic hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Sepsis/septicaemia
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency
Vascular causes: Budd-Chiari syndrome
Wilson’s disease
Chronic liver disease/cirrhosis
Drugs: paracetamol overdose,
isoniazid, statins, sodium valproate
Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Intra-luminal causes such as gallstones
Mural causes such as strictures
cholangiocarcinoma or biliary
Extrinsic compression: pancreatic
cancer, lymph nodes at porta hepatis
Drug-induced cholestasis: flucloxacillin,
co-amoxiclav, nitrofurantoin

<!-- page:285 -->
266
Acute Medicine
Patients with suspected acute liver failure and grade 3 or 4 encephalopathy should be managed in an
intensive care unit.
•	 Assess for abdominal pain, distension or tenderness
•	 These can be seen in a range of medical and surgical disorders (Chapter 36). Obtain an urgent surgical
opinion.
Further management
Further management is directed by the working diagnosis.
•	 If there is evidence of haemolytic anaemia (anaemia with increased reticulocyte count, abnormal blood
film, elevated plasma lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and low plasma haptoglobin), seek urgent advice from
a haematologist.
•	 Patients with presumed viral hepatitis can be discharged home with early clinic follow-up arranged, provided
all the following criteria are met:
•	 They are clinically stable and not encephalopathic.
•	 Paracetamol poisoning, drug toxicity and other disorders that result in high AST/ALT levels have been
considered and excluded (Table 35.4).
•	 In women of child-bearing age, a pregnancy test is negative.
•	 If imaging demonstrates obstructive jaundice, early hepatobiliary intervention to achieve biliary decompression is needed: see Chapter 43.
Table 35.2  Focused assessment of the jaundiced patient.
History
Duration and time course of jaundice and other symptoms (e.g. fever and abdominal pain)
Known liver or biliary tract disease?
Itching/pruritus?
Constitutional symptoms: weight loss, low-grade fever, lymphadenopathy and fatigue?
Full drug history: including all non-prescription drugs, herbal remedies, dietary supplements, mushroom ingestion or
khat, taken over the past year
Risk factors for viral hepatitis (foreign travel, IV drug use, men who have sex with men, multiple sexual partners,
body piercing and tattoos, blood transfusion and blood products, needle-stick injury in health-care worker)?
Sexual history
Pregnancy?
Usual and recent alcohol intake?
Other medical problems (e.g. cardiovascular disease, transplant recipient, cancer, HIV/AIDS, haematological disease
and inflammatory bowel disease)?
Family history of jaundice/liver disease, malignancy?
Examination
Physiological observations and systematic examination
Conscious level and mental state; grade of encephalopathy if present (see Chapter 42)
Signs of chronic liver disease?
Right upper quadrant tenderness (Table 35.4)?
Liver enlargement (seen in early viral hepatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, malignant infiltration, congestive heart failure and
acute Budd–Chiari syndrome)?
Splenomegaly?
Signs associated with coagulopathy: bruising, petechiae, purpura
Ascites (Chapter 36)?
Lymphadenopathy?
Signs of upper gastrointestinal bleeding: melaena (digital rectal examination), haematemesis

<!-- page:286 -->
Jaundice
267
Further reading
National Institute for Care and Health Excellence (2014) Gallstone disease: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg188?unlid=10194680392016226172055.
Roy-Chowdhury N, Roy-Chowdhury J. (2016) Diagnostic approach to the adult with jaundice or asymptomatic
hyperbilirubinemia. UpToDate https://www.uptodate.com/contents/diagnostic-approach-to-the-adult-
withjaundice-or-asymptomatic-hyperbilirubinemia?source=search_result&search=acute%20jaundice&
selectedTitle=1∼150.
Ryan DP, Hong TS, Bardeesy N. (2014) Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 371, 1039–1049.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra1404198.
Table 35.3  Urgent investigation in acute jaundice.
Full blood count and film
Coagulation screen
Blood glucose
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests: bilirubin (total and unconjugated), aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, gamma
Glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, albumin
Paracetamol level (Chapter 8)
Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and haptoglobin if suspected haemolysis
Blood culture if febrile
Urine stick test, microscopy and culture
Markers of viral hepatitis (anti-HAV IgM, HBsAg, anti-HBc IgM, anti-HCV, anti-HEV and EBV)
Test for HIV
Autoimmune screen (ANA, AMA, SMA, ANCA and immunoglobulins)
Microscopy and culture of ascites if present (aspirate 10 mL for cell count (use EDTA tube) and culture (inoculate blood
culture bottles) (see Chapter 24)
Ultrasound of liver, biliary tract and hepatic/portal vein and consider cross-sectional imaging (CT or MRI)
Pregnancy test in women of child-bearing age
Consider copper studies in young adults (Wilson disease, see Table 42.1)
AMA, anti-mitochondrial antibody; ANA, anti-nuclear antibody; ANCA, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. EBV,
Epstein-Barr Virus; EDTA, ethylene diaminetetra-acetic acid; HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBc, hepatitis B core; HBsAg,
hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IgM,
immunoglobulin M; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; SMA, smooth muscle antibody.
Table 35.4  Causes of plasma aspartate and alanine transaminase levels of more than 1000 units/L.
Common
Acute viral hepatitis, Ischaemic hepatitis
Acute drug or toxin-related liver injury (most commonly paracetamol)
Less common or rare
Acute exacerbation of autoimmune chronic active hepatitis
Reactivation of chronic hepatitis B
Acute Budd–Chiari syndrome
Veno-occlusive disease
HELLP syndrome of pregnancy (haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count)
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Hepatic infarction (may complicate HELLP syndrome)
Hepatitis delta in a chronic carrier of hepatitis B
Acute Wilson disease
Massive lymphomatous infiltration of the liver
Parasitic biliary obstruction
