# CHAPTER 38 Haematemesis and melaena

- Pages: 298-305
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:298 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
279
About 90% of non-variceal bleeds and 50% of variceal bleeds stop spontaneously. Mortality is around 7–10%
in patients with non-variceal bleeds, and 30% in those with variceal bleeds. Almost all deaths occur in
patients >65 years and those with major comorbidities, most often from multi-organ failure secondary to
hypovolaemia/hypotension.
Priorities
1	 Make a rapid clinical assessment, to include an estimate of the volume of blood lost (Table 38.2). Put in
a large-bore IV cannula (e.g. green or grey Venflon), and take 20 mL of blood for urgent investigations
(Table 38.3). Initial fluid resuscitation should be with IV crystalloid. Give blood when available if the patient
is shocked, or actively bleeding with a haemoglobin of <90 g/L.
Haematemesis and melaena
Udi Shmueli
CHAPTER 38
Table 38.1  Causes of upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
Common
Gastric or duodenal peptic ulcer
Oesophageal or gastric varices
Erosive oesophagitis, gastritis or duodenitis
No lesion identified (10–15% cases; usually because the lesion is obscured by blood, difficult to identify, such as
Dieulafoy’s lesion, or healed by the time of the gastroscopy)
Less common or rare
Portal hypertensive gastropathy
Angiodysplasia
Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE), (long red stripes arising from the pylorus, also known as ‘watermelon’ stomach)
Mass lesions (polyp or cancer)
Mallory-Weiss syndrome (Chapter 37)
Dieulafoy’s lesion (an abnormally large submucosal vessel that erodes the gastric epithelium bleeding intermittently;
there is no primary ulcer and so in the absence of bleeding it is difficult to see)
Haemobilia (bleeding from the bile duct)
Haemosuccus pancreaticus (bleeding from the pancreatic duct)
Aorto-enteric fistula (fistula between aneurysmal aorta or aortic graft and the gut, most often duodenum; endoscopy is
primarily to exclude bleeding from other causes; the fistula may not be visualised)
Cameron lesions (linear ulcers within the sac of a hiatus hernia at the diaphragmatic impression)

<!-- page:299 -->
280
Acute Medicine
Table 38.2  Focused assessment in acute upper GI bleeding.
History
Has there been haematemesis, melaena or both? Did vomiting precede the first haematemesis (suggesting Mallory–Weiss tear, although this history is absent in 50% of cases)? Was bleeding associated with syncope?
Has there been previous upper gastrointestinal bleeding? What was the cause?
Current and recent drug therapy: ask specifically about non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), aspirin,
clopidogrel, warfarin and direct-acting oral anticoagulants
Usual and recent alcohol intake
Known chronic liver disease
Other medical problems, for example heart disease, chronic kidney disease, haematological conditions.
Examination
Estimate the volume of blood loss from the physiological observations:
Major bleed (>1500 mL; >30% of blood volume)
Minor bleed (≤750 mL; <15% of blood volume)
Pulse ≤120/min
Pulse <100/min
Systolic BP <120 mmHg (note this is influenced by age and
usual blood pressure)
Systolic BP ≤120 mmHg, with postural fall <20 from
lying to sitting
Cool or cold extremities
Normal perfusion of extremities
Tachypnoea (respiratory rate >20/min)
Normal respiratory rate
Abnormal mental state: agitation, confusion, reduced
conscious level
Normal mental state
Signs of chronic liver disease?
Abdominal tenderness or masses?
Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly or ascites?
Table 38.3  Urgent investigation in acute upper GI bleeding.
Full blood count
Group and screen serum: crossmatch at least 4 units of whole blood if there is shock, significant blood loss or initial
haemoglobin <100 g/L
Coagulation screen
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests
ECG
Chest X-ray
Haematemesis is the vomiting of red blood and indicates moderate or severe acute upper
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.
Coffee-ground vomiting is the vomiting of dark brown vomitus that resembles coffee grounds. It
results from the oxidation of haem to haematin by gastric acid and indicates minor upper GI bleeding
that has slowed or stopped.
Melaena is black, tarry stool and typically indicates upper GI bleeding. Small intestinal or right colon
bleeding can also cause melaena (Chapter 39). Upper GI bleeding of >50–100 mL is required to cause
melaena, which may persist for several days after bleeding has ceased. Black stool that is not melaena
may result from ingestion of iron or some foods.
Haematochezia is the passage of liquid blood or clots per rectum, and usually indicates lower GI
bleeding (Chapter 39), but sometimes can result from severe upper GI bleeding with rapid transit of
blood through the gut.
Box 38.1  Manifestations of acute upper GI bleeding

<!-- page:300 -->
Haematemesis and melaena
281
The Blatchford score (Table 38.4) is a screening tool to assess the probability that endoscopic intervention
or blood transfusion will be needed, and is helpful when discussing the patient’s management with
colleagues.
2	 If there is hypovolaemic shock (systolic blood pressure ≤90 mmHg, pulse ≤100/min, cold
extremities):
•	 Give oxygen 60–100% and attach an electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor.
•	 Obtain help:
•	 Inform gastroenterology/surgical and critical care colleagues, and contact the on-call endoscopy service,
to arrange an urgent endoscopy.
•	 Put out a major haemorrhage call.
Acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage
Haematemesis and/or malaena
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Oxygen, ECG monitor, IV access with large-bore cannula
Focused assessment (Tables 38.2)
Urgent investigation (Table 38.3)
Hypovolaemic shock?
Yes
Yes
No
No
See Table 38.4
Restore circulating volume with crystalloid/blood
Contact on-call gastroenterologist/surgeon
Likely cause of bleeding?
Vanceal
Non-variceal
Urgent endoscopy
Continued
bleeding
Bleeding stops)
Shocked at presentation?
Yes
No
Urgent endoscopy
Endoscopy within 24 h
Endoscopic haemostasis, surgery or drug therapy as appropriate
Slow infusion
of crystalloid
Signiﬁcant blood loss?
Signs of blood loss >750mL (Table 38.2)
Haemoglobin <10g/dl
Figure 38.1  Management of acute upper GI bleeding.

<!-- page:301 -->
282
Acute Medicine
•	 Transfuse blood products within the pre-assembled packs. If systolic blood pressure remains <100 mmHg,
use uncrossmatched O Rhesus negative blood (Rhesus positive blood is acceptable for males and
post-menopausal females). Start transfusing crossmatched blood as soon as it is available, via a second IV
cannula. Use a blood warmer if infusing at >50 mL/kg/h.
•	 Correct clotting abnormalities (see below).
•	 Consider inserting a urinary catheter to monitor the urine output (aim for urine output of 0.5 mL/kg/h).
3	 Managing anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents and coagulopathies (Chapter 85) and Platelets
Holding and reversal of these agents should be individualised, bearing in mind the risks of thromboembolic
events.
Emergency Endoscopy should not be delayed for reversal of anticoagulation.
•	 Warfarin
•	 Hold warfarin if there is minor bleeding, or the bleeding has stopped.
•	 With serious or life-threatening bleeding reverse warfarin with Prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC)
and vitamin K 5-10 mg by intravenous injection: discuss with haematologist.
•	 Directly acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
•	 Ask when the last dose was taken as the half-life of these drugs is usually only 8–12 h. It is usually sufficient to just hold the DOAC.
Table 38.4  Blatchford score.
Add the scores for each risk marker. If no value applies to a particular marker, score 0. A total
score can range from 0 to 23. A score above zero indicates the need for admission and
inpatient endoscopy.
Risk marker on admission
Score
Blood urea (mmol/L)
≤6.5 <8.0
2
≤8.0 <10.0
3
≤10.0 <25
4
≤25
6
Haemoglobin (g/L) for men
≤120 <130
1
≤100 <120
3
<100
6
Haemoglobin (g/L) for women
≤100 <120
1
<100
6
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)
100–109
1
90–99
2
<90
3
Other markers
Pulse ≤100/min
1
Presentation with melaena
1
Presentation with syncope
2
Hepatic disease
2
Heart failure
2

<!-- page:302 -->
Haematemesis and melaena
283
•	 If necessary due to instability prothrombin complex concentrate can help reverse DOACs: discuss with
haematologist
•	 In life-threatening emergencies dabigatran can be reversed with idarucizumab. Rivaroxaban, edoxaban
and apixaban can be reversed with the even more expensive Andexanet alfa. They work in minutes but
there is a significant risk of thromboembolic events: discuss with haematologist.
•	 Low dose aspirin
•	 Taken for secondary prevention low dose aspirin (75 mg) can be continued.
•	 Taken for primary prevention it could be stopped.
•	 Dual antiplatelet therapy
Continue the aspirin, stop the second antiplatelet agent, but discuss with cardiology and restart as soon as
possible preferably within five days.
•	 If the platelet count is <50 × 109/L, and the patient is actively bleeding, give platelet concentrate: discuss
with a haematologist.
4	 If you suspect bleeding oesophageal or gastric varices (because of a past history of variceal bleeding
or chronic liver disease):
•	 Give terlipressin 2 mg IV followed by 1–2 mg 4–6 hourly until bleeding is controlled, for up to five days.
•	 Give IV antibiotic as per your local guidelines (e.g. co-amoxiclav 1.2 g 8-hourly IV or tazocin 4.5 g 8-hourly IV),
to prevent bacterial infection (including spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, Chapter 36), which is a common
complication.
•	 Contact the endoscopy service for urgent endoscopy, anaesthetic/critical care support may be required if
there is continued bleeding or any impairment in conscious level.
•	 If there is continued variceal bleeding (and the airway is protected by endotracheal intubation), a Sengstaken–Blakemore tube can be inserted by an experienced operator.
•	 Other supportive measures for patients with decompensated chronic liver disease are discussed in Chapter 42.
5	 In patients without shock but with evidence of significant blood loss (e.g. syncope in association
with bleeding; clinical signs of blood loss >750 mL) or haemoglobin <100 g/L:
•	 Start an infusion of crystalloid to maintain systolic blood pressure >100 mmHg.
•	 Transfuse blood if the initial haemoglobin is <70 g/L. Correct clotting abnormalities (see above).
•	 Contact the on-call endoscopy service to arrange endoscopy within 24 h.
Further management
Blood transfusion
Once the volume deficit has been corrected, recheck the haemoglobin and transfuse blood if this is 70 g/L or
below. The target haemoglobin is 70–100 g/L.
Endoscopy
•	 Urgent endoscopy is needed for patients with shock on admission (but not before adequate resuscitation),
with known varices or signs of chronic liver disease, or evidence of continued bleeding.
•	 Other patients should have endoscopy within 24 hours of admission (with the exception of those with a
Blatchford score of zero, who can be considered for discharge with outpatient endoscopy). They can be
allowed to eat, but must be nil by mouth for >4 h prior to endoscopy.
Drug therapy
•	 Stop nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
•	 Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy see above.

<!-- page:303 -->
284
Acute Medicine
•	 There is no evidence that starting a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) before endoscopy alters outcome.
Treatment with a PPI makes testing for Helicobacter pylori unreliable. But pre-endoscopy high-dose
intravenous PPI therapy can be considered, to downstage endoscopic stigmata and thereby reduce the
need for endoscopic therapy.
•	 Tranexamic acid is not helpful.
Management after endoscopy
•	 Calculate the Rockall score (Table 38.5). Those with a score ≤2 can be discharged (predicted mortality <1%).
Those with a score ≥3 should remain in hospital for close observation.
•	 Further management is determined by the endoscopic diagnosis and should be discussed with a
gastroenterologist.
Peptic ulcer
•	 Patients with low-risk peptic ulcer bleeding based on clinical and endoscopic criteria (e.g. clean ulcer base)
can be discharged on the same day as endoscopy.
•	 Most patients with high-risk peptic ulcer bleeding based on clinical and endoscopic criteria (e.g. stigmata of
recent haemorrhage) should remain hospitalised for at least 72 h.
•	 Start a PPI. If the patient is stable and able to tolerate oral medication, this can be administered by mouth
(e.g. omeprazole 40 mg PO 12-hourly). If the patient is at high risk of further bleeding (high Rockall score)
or unable to tolerate oral medication, give a bolus of omeprazole (or pantoprazole) 80 mg IV followed by an
infusion of 8 mg/h for 72 h.
•	 Rebleeding after an initial endoscopy requires either a repeat endoscopy or referral to interventional radiology, depending on the initial findings at endoscopy. If interventional radiology is not promptly available,
refer for surgery.
•	 Full-dose PPIs should be given for at least four weeks.
Table 38.5  Rockall score post-endoscopy.
Add the scores at the top of each column for each of the variables to derive a total risk score. The total score can range
from 0 to 11.
Score
0
1
2
3
Age shock on
admission?
<60 no shock (systolic
blood pressure ≤100,
pulse <100)
60–79 Tachycardia
(systolic BP ≤100,
pulse ≤100)
≤80 Hypotension
(systolic BP <100)
Comorbidity
None
Heart failure, ischaemic
heart disease, any
other comorbidity
Renal failure,
liver failure,
disseminated
malignancy
Diagnosis at
endoscopy
Mallory–Weiss tear, no
lesion seen, no signs of
recent bleeding
All other diagnosis
Malignancy of upper
GI tract
Major stigmata of
recent bleeding at
endoscopy
None or dark spot only
Blood in upper GI tract,
adherent clot, visible or
spurting vessel

<!-- page:304 -->
Haematemesis and melaena
285
•	 Most patients with gastric ulcers should have a repeat endoscopy at six to eight weeks to confirm healing
and exclude malignancy.
•	 If Helicobacter pylori positive, start eradication treatment according to local protocols. Most ulcers not due
to NSAIDs or aspirin are associated with H. pylori infection. As the Clotest taken at endoscopy may be falsely
negative when taken at the time of an acute bleed, a high index of suspicion should be kept and a urease
breath test or faecal antigen test (off PPIs for two weeks) should be ordered after the acute event when
appropriate. Gastric biopsies taken for histology at the time of the initial endoscopy can also improve the
detection rate.
•	 Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy: NSAIDs should be stopped; low-dose aspirin, if needed for secondary prevention of vascular events or coronary stent thrombosis, can be continued with concomitant PPI
therapy. Other antiplatelet agents (e.g. clopidogrel) should be stopped temporarily and timing of restarting
discussed with the appropriate specialist (cardiologist or stroke physician).
Erosive gastritis
There are two groups of patients:
•	 Previously well patients in whom erosive gastritis is related to aspirin, NSAIDs or alcohol. Bleeding usually
stops when these agents are withdrawn and no specific treatment is needed. A short course of a PPI can be
given to limit concomitant damage from acid exposure. H. pylori should be treated if present.
•	 In critically ill patients with stress ulceration, in whom the mortality is high, correct clotting abnormalities and
give a PPI. Sucralfate is also an option.
Oesophagitis and oesophageal ulcer
Give a PPI for at least four weeks. Oesophagitis may require indefinite treatment with PPI.
Oesophageal and gastric varices
•	 Variceal bleeding stops spontaneously in 50% of patients. The risk of further bleeding can be substantially
reduced by follow-up endoscopic therapy to obliterate residual varices and administration of a non-selective
beta blocker (e.g. propranolol or carvedilol).
•	 Discuss management of the varices and the underlying cause of portal hypertension with a gastroenterologist or hepatologist.
Mallory-Weiss tear
•	 Bleeding usually stops spontaneously and rebleeding is rare.
•	 If bleeding continues, the options are repeated endoscopy with a view to endotherapy (argon-plasma coagulation, application of haemostasis clip), tamponade using a Sengstaken–Blakemore tube, or interventional
radiology for embolization.
Negative endoscopy
•	 In 15–20% of patients, the first endoscopy does not reveal a source of bleeding. Discuss repeating the
endoscopy, especially if blood or food obscured the views obtained, or the patient has chronic liver disease
(as varices which have recently bled may not be visible).
•	 Patients who presented with melaena alone, should be investigated for a small bowel or proximal colonic
source of bleeding (Chapter  39). A normal blood urea suggests a colonic cause of melaena, except in
patients with chronic liver disease (in whom urea levels are often low).
•	 Computed tomography (CT) angiography can be useful after two negative endoscopies, but only if
performed when the patient is actively bleeding.

<!-- page:305 -->
286
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Gralnek IM, Stanley AJ, Morris AJ, et al. (2021) Endoscopic diagnosis and management of nonvariceal upper
gastrointestinal hemorrhage (NVUGIH): European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline –
Update 2021. Endoscopy 53(3), 300–332.
Stanley AJ, Laine L. (2019) Management of acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding. BMJ 364, l536.
Siau K, Hearnshaw S, Stanley AJ, et al. (2020) British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG)-led multisociety
consensus care bundle for the early clinical management of acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
Frontline Gastroenterol 11, 311–323.
Gerson LB, Fidler JL, Cave DR, Leighton JA. (2015) American College of Gastroenterology Clinical Guideline:
diagnosis and management of small bowel bleeding. Am J Gastroenterol 110, 1265–1287.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2015) Blood transfusion. NICE guideline (NG24).
https:// www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng24.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016) Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s:
management. Clinical guideline (CG141). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg141?
unlid=122385053201610212730.
Tripathi DJ, Stanley AJ, Hayes PC. (2015) UK guidelines on the management of variceal haemorrhage in
cirrhotic patients. Gut 64, 1680–1704. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309262.
