# CHAPTER 42 Acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease

- Pages: 323-331
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:323 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 42
304
Liver failure
The term liver failure is applied to two distinct syndromes: acute liver failure (ALF) and decompensated chronic
liver disease. Management of suspected liver failure is summarised in Figure 42.1.
ALF is defined as severe acute liver injury (ALI) with encephalopathy and impaired liver synthetic function
(international normalised ratio ≥1.5) in the absence of pre-existing liver disease; an illness duration of
<26 weeks distinguishes acute from chronic liver failure. ALF has an annual incidence of around 5 per million
in the United Kingdom. Causes are given in Table 42.1.
Decompensated chronic liver disease (acute on chronic liver failure) is defined as a syndrome in patients
with chronic liver disease, with or without previously diagnosed cirrhosis, characterised by acute hepatic
decompensation resulting in liver failure (jaundice and prolongation of the prothrombin time/international
normalised ratio), and one or more extrahepatic organ failures. Management is focused on identification and
treatment of the precipitant(s) (Table 42.6) while providing supportive care.
Acute liver failure
Consider ALI in any patient with liver damage (serum aminotransferases 2–3× upper limit of normal) and
impaired liver function with jaundice and/or coagulopathy. The development of hepatic encephalopathy
with/after ALI is suggestive of ALF. Particular aetiologies favour ALF (e.g. paracetamol toxicity). Common causes
for ALF are shown in Table 42.1.
The prognosis of ALF is related to the time taken for encephalopathy to develop and the aetiology.
Hyperacute liver failure (the development of encephalopathy <7 days after jaundice) is associated with a better
prognosis than ALF (jaundice to encephalopathy between 8 and 28 days) and sub-ALF (jaundice to encephalopathy in 4–12 weeks). Aetiologies with the worst prognosis include non-A, non-B causes for ALF, while
paracetamol toxicity and pregnancy-related syndromes have the most favourable outcomes.
Priorities
If you suspect ALF:
1	 Check the blood glucose, as hypoglycaemia is a common complication.
•	 If <4.0 mmol/L, give 100 mL of 20% glucose or 200 mL of 10% glucose over 15–30 min IV. Recheck
blood glucose after 10 min, if still <4.0 mmol/L, repeat the above IV glucose treatment.
Acute liver failure and decompensated
chronic liver disease
Ben Warner and Lynn Affarah
CHAPTER 42

<!-- page:324 -->
Acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease
305
•	 Start an IV infusion of 10% glucose, initially 1 L/12 h, to prevent hypoglycaemia; use a large peripheral
vein as it can cause thrombophlebitis.
2	 Make a focused clinical assessment (Table 42.2), including a detailed drug history (including any herbal and
over-the-counter medications) from the patient or family members, and arrange urgent investigations
(Table 42.3).
3	 Start N-acetylcysteine (NAC) without delay using the standard regimen (Chapter 8) even in non-paracetamol
poisoning, as it can be hepato-protective.
4	 If there is grade 3 or 4 encephalopathy, transfer the patient to an ICU for elective intubation and ventilation.
Other patients with ALF should be nursed in a high-dependency unit.
5	 Obtain advice on management from a hepatologist or your regional liver unit, with the investigation results
to hand when you make the phone call.
Suspected liver failure (Table 42.1)
Jaundice with abnormal behaviour or reduced conscious level and
prolonged prothrombin time not corrected by vitamin K 10 mg IV
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Stabilize airway, breathing and circulation
Treat/prevent hypoglycaemia: start glucose 10% IV infusion,
initially 1 L 12-hourly
Focused assessment (Table 42.2)
Urgent investigation (Table 42.3)
Grade 3 or 4 hepatic encephalopathy? (Table 42.2)
Transfer to intensive
care unit (ICU)
Consider elective ventilation
Transfer to highdependency unit (HDU)
Known chronic liver disease?
Establish and treat causes
of decompensation (Table
42.6)
Supportive care
Working diagnosis of acute
liver failure
Establish and treat cause
(Table 42.1)
Supportive care
Urgent hepatology opinion
Transfer to liver unit
Continue care locally
No
Yes
No
Yes
Figure 42.1  Management of suspected acute liver failure.

<!-- page:325 -->
306
Acute Medicine
Determining the cause of ALF (Table 42.1)
•	 In the United Kingdom, paracetamol poisoning causes around 50% of ALF, and viral hepatitis around 40%.
The mortality of patients with paracetamol poisoning who reach medical attention is 0.4%. Where ALF
occurs due to viral hepatitis, mortality is around 40% and 60% due to non-A, non-B viral hepatitis.
Table 42.1  Causes of acute liver failure (fulminant hepatic failure).
Cause
Comment
Drug-related
Paracetamol poisoning is the commonest cause of ALF in the United Kingdom; AST/
ALT are typically >3500 units/L
Idiosyncratic reaction (usually occurs within six months of starting drug); many drugs
implicated, including Co-Amoxiclav, Flucloxacillin, chemotherapy agents, statins,
phenytoin, carbamazepine
Viral hepatitis
Hepatitis A, B or E virus
Herpes simplex virus -1 and -2 (a rare cause; usually seen in patients taking
immunosuppressive therapy or in third trimester of pregnancy)
Varicella zoster virus
Ischaemic hepatitis
(‘shock liver’)
May occur after cardiac arrest or prolonged hypotension, or in severe heart failure,
and therefore often associated with acute kidney injury
Markedly raised AST/ALT
Acute Budd-Chiari
syndrome
Due to acute hepatic vein occlusion (thrombosis)
Typically occurs in women aged 20–40 years, with underlying haematological disorder
(e.g. polycythaemia rubra vera, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria) or other
cause of thrombophilia (P. 567 Table 100.6)
Heterogenous presentation: typically presents in a more chronic form with right upper
quadrant pain, hepatomegaly and ascites, but can rarely present with fulminant liver
failure (often with concomitant renal failure) (Chapter 86)
Diagnosed by duplex ultrasonography of hepatic veins and IVC or computed
tomography/magnetic resonance imaging (CT/MRI)
Pregnancy-related
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) and haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low
platelets (HELLP) occur in the last trimester of pregnancy and are often associated
with pre-eclampsia (Chapter 103)
Autoimmune hepatitis
(AIH)
About 25% of AIH presentations occur acutely/sub-acutely
Consider if there are other autoimmune disorders (e.g. haemolytic anaemia, idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura, type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis, coeliac disease)
Autoantibodies (antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies) and
hypergammaglobulinaemia usually present
Amanita phalloides
poisoning
Suspect if the patient has eaten wild mushrooms
Usually associated with severe gastrointestinal poisoning symptoms (nausea, vomiting,
diarrhoea and abdominal pain), which develop within hours to one day of ingestion
Wilson disease
Suspect in a patient age <30 with liver failure and Coombs-negative haemolytic
anaemia (giving markedly elevated bilirubin)
Kayser-Fleischer rings are present in ∼50%
Serum ceruloplasmin is typically low (but may be normal in ∼15% and is often
reduced in other forms of ALF) and serum/urinary copper levels high
Alkaline phosphatase and urate are low
Malignant infiltration
May occur in breast cancer, small cell lung cancer, lymphoma and melanoma
Associated with hepatomegaly
Diagnosis made by imaging and biopsy
Consider haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) in lymphoma
Cause unclear
Retake the drug history
Consider transjugular liver biopsy
ALF, acute liver failure; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; IVC, inferior vena cava.

<!-- page:326 -->
Acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease
307
•	 Consider mushroom (Amanita phalloides) poisoning in patients with a compatible history; severe
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal pain develop within hours to one day of ingestion. Penicillin
G 300,000 units/kg/day and milk thistle (silibinin) 30–40 mg/kg/day PO or IV are recognised treatments.
•	 Wilson’s disease and autoimmune hepatitis, although both forms of chronic liver disease, can be treated as
if they are ALF. Wilson’s classically presents with Coombs-negative haemolytic anaemia and a high bilirubin
to ALP ratio. The diagnosis is confirmed by high urinary copper levels. Treatment aims to lower serum copper
levels via haemofiltration. Penicillamine is not recommended acutely. Autoimmune hepatitis should be
treated with 40–60 mg prednisolone PO per day.
•	 The presence of a nodular liver on imaging in a patient suspected of having ALF does not necessarily indicate
that the patient has pre-existing cirrhosis. Nodularity can occur with benign conditions. As the severity of
Table 42.2  Focused assessment of the patient with possible acute liver failure.
History
Duration and time course of jaundice and other symptoms (e.g. fever and abdominal pain)
Known liver or biliary tract disease?
Full drug history: including all non-prescription drugs, herbal remedies, dietary supplements, mushroom ingestion or
khat, taken over the past year
Risk factors for viral hepatitis (foreign travel, IV drug use, men who have sex with men, multiple sexual partners, body
piercing and tattoos, blood transfusion and blood products and needle-stick injury in health-care worker)?
History of depression, previous drug overdoses or previous attempts of suicide
Pregnancy?
Usual and recent alcohol intake?
History of substance misuse or recreational drugs
Other medical problems (e.g. cardiovascular disease, transplant recipient, cancer, human immunodeficiency virus/
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and haematological disease)?
Family history of jaundice/liver disease?
Examination
Physiological observations and systematic examination
Conscious level and mental state; grade of encephalopathy if present:
Grading of hepatic encephalopathy
Grade
Clinical features
Subclinical
Impaired work, personality change, sleep disturbance
Abnormal findings on psychomotor testing
Grade 1
Mild confusion, agitation, apathy, oriented in time and place
Fine tremor, asterixis
Grade 2 Grade 3
Drowsiness, lethargy, disoriented in time Asterixis, dysarthria
Sleepy but rousable, disoriented in time and place
Hyperreflexia, hyperventilation
Grade 4
Responsive only to painful stimuli or unresponsive
Asterixis? Ask the patient to hold the arms outstretched with the wrists extended and fingers spread apart, and eyes
closed, for 30 s or longer. The sign is positive if after a brief latent period, there is a sudden lapse of maintenance of
the posture.
Hepatic foetor?
Signs of chronic liver disease?
Right upper quadrant tenderness?
Liver enlargement (seen in early viral hepatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, malignant infiltration, congestive heart failure and
acute Budd–Chiari syndrome)?
Splenomegaly?
Ascites (Chapter 36)?

<!-- page:327 -->
308
Acute Medicine
fibrosis increases, so, too, does the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting cirrhosis. The gold standard for diagnosing cirrhosis is liver biopsy, or non-invasively by a Fibroscan.
•	 ALF in women in the third trimester of pregnancy is most commonly due to haemolysis, elevated liver
enzymes, low platelets (HELLP) syndrome (coexistent hypertension and proteinuria) or acute fatty liver of
pregnancy (AFLP) (see Chapter 32). AFLP can be confirmed by hepatic steatosis on imaging. Other causes of
ALF, however, also occur in pregnancy. Treatment is alongside maternity staff and commonly involves prompt
delivery of the foetus.
Further management of acute liver failure before transfer
to a Liver Unit
General care and monitoring
•	 Nurse the patient with 30 head-up tilt in a quiet area of an ICU or high-dependency unit, avoiding unnecessary disturbance.
•	 Monitor the conscious level, pulse, blood pressure, temperature and plasma glucose 1–4-hourly. Monitor
oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter and give oxygen by mask to maintain SaO2 >90%.
Table 42.3  Urgent investigation in suspected acute liver failure.
Needed urgently
Arterial blood gases, pH, lactate
Blood glucose
Prothrombin time (PT)/international normalised ratio (INR) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
Full blood count and reticulocyte count
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine (urea may be low because of reduced hepatic synthesis; if markedly elevated
with a normal creatinine, suspect upper gastrointestinal bleeding)
Liver function tests: bilirubin (including split bilirubin), aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase and albumin
Amylase and lipase
Paracetamol level (even if history is not suggestive, should always be performed)
Septic screen including:
•	 Blood culture
•	 Urine stick test, microscopy and culture
•	 Microscopy and culture of ascites if present (aspirate 10 mL for cell count (use EDTA tube) and culture (inoculate
blood culture bottles) (see Chapter 36)
•	 Chest X-ray
•	 Fungal screen (beta D glucan and galactomannan)
CT head (to rule out other causes of altered consciousness besides hepatic encephalopathy)
Abdominal imaging: ultrasound of liver, biliary tract and hepatic/portal veins or CT abdomen/liver with triple phase to
assess vasculature
ECG
Pregnancy test in women of childbearing age
For later analysis
Markers of viral hepatitis (anti-HAV IgM, HBsAg, anti-HBc IgM, anti-HCV, anti-HDV, anti-HEV, anti-HSV and anti-VZV)
HIV test
Autoimmune profile (antinuclear antibodies, antismooth muscle antibodies and immunoglobulins)
Plasma ceruloplasmin in patients aged <50 (to exclude Wilson’s disease)
Serum (10 mL) and urine (50 mL) for toxicological analysis if needed
Blood group and screen
EDTA, ethylene diaminetetra-acetic acid; HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBc, hepatitis B core; HBsAG, hepatitis B surface
antigen; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HDV, hepatitis D virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; VZV, varicella
zoster virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M.

<!-- page:328 -->
Acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease
309
•	 Give platelet concentrate before placing central venous and arterial lines if the platelet count is <50 × 109/L.
Avoid giving fresh frozen plasma (FFP) unless there is active bleeding, as this affects coagulation tests – the
best prognostic marker – for several days, and can precipitate fluid overload. If correction of coagulopathy
is needed, discuss with your local haematologist: typically, FFP is given in combination with recombinant
activated factor VIIa.
•	 If encephalopathy is grade 2 or more, or if systolic BP is <90 mmHg, central venous pressure monitoring and
a urinary catheter will be required. Fluid resuscitation should be with 4.5% human albumin solution (HAS)
or normal saline unless the blood glucose levels are low.
•	 If encephalopathy progresses to grade 3 or 4, arrange elective intubation and ventilation.
•	 If there is any evidence of sepsis, then commence antibiotics and antifungals after a full septic screen.
•	 Give lactulose to assist in ammonia excretion and prevent worsening encephalopathy. Avoid any potentially
nephrotoxic agents.
•	 Put in a nasogastric tube for gastric drainage if the patient is vomiting or is ventilated. Start enteral feeding
early or parenteral feeding if required. Replace potassium, magnesium and phosphate as needed (Chapter 52).
Management of complications
Complications of ALF and management of complications are summarised in Table 42.4.
•	 Give mannitol 20% 100–200 mL (0.5–1.0 g/kg) IV over 10 min alongside maintenance of mean arterial
pressure (MAP) at >75 mmHg using vasopressors, with a cerebral perfusion pressure of 60–80 mmHg.
•	 Increase plasma sodium to 145–155 mmol/L with hypertonic normal saline (Chapter 52).
•	 Avoid seizures by using phenytoin alongside short-acting benzodiazepines.
•	 Consider therapeutic hypothermia 32–34 °C as a bridge to transplantation.
Table 42.4  Major complications of acute liver failure and their management.
Complication
Management
Cerebral oedema
See text
Hypotension
Correct hypovolaemia with blood or 4.5% human albumin solution
Use epinephrine, norepinephrine or dopamine infusion (Chapter 2) to maintain
mean arterial pressure >60 mmHg
Acute kidney injury
Correct hypovolemia
Stop nephrotoxic medication
Avoid high-dose furosemide
See Hepatorenal syndrome below
Start renal replacement therapy if anuric or oliguric with plasma creatinine
>400 μmol/L
Hypoglycaemia
Give glucose 10% IV 1 L 12-hourly to prevent hypoglycaemia
Check blood glucose 1–4 hourly
If blood glucose is <4.0 mmol/L, give 100 mL of 20% glucose or 200 mL of
10% glucose over 15–30 min IV; recheck blood glucose after 10 min, if still
<4.0 mmol/L, repeat
Coagulopathy
Give vitamin K 10 mg IV daily
Prophylactic correction of coagulopathy with fresh frozen plasma and platelet
transfusion is not recommended (may increase risk of thrombosis or
transfusion-related lung injury). Consider in special circumstances such as
invasive procedures or active bleeding.
Review venous thrombosis prophylaxis daily
Anaemia
Transfuse if haemoglobin <70 g/dL
(continued )

<!-- page:329 -->
310
Acute Medicine
Criteria for liver transplantation
These are summarised in Table 42.5.
Management of decompensated chronic liver disease
Priorities
Search for and treat precipitants (Tables 42.6).
•	 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is common and may not be accompanied by abdominal tenderness. If
there are ascites, aspirate 10 mL for cell count and microscopy and culture (inoculate blood culture bottles).
Complication
Management
Gastric stress ulceration
Prophylaxis with proton pump inhibitor, ranitidine or sucralfate
Hypoxaemia
Many possible causes: inhalation/aspiration, infection, pulmonary oedema,
atelectasis and intrapulmonary haemorrhage.
Increase inspired oxygen
Ventilate with positive end-expiratory pressure if SaO2 remains <92%
Sepsis
Daily culture of blood, sputum and urine
Early treatment of presumed infection with broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy:
discuss with microbiologist
Consider antifungal therapy if fever with negative blood cultures
Nutrition
Oral nutrition should be encouraged
Low threshold to commence enteral nutrition or parenteral nutrition
Cerebral oedema occurs in 75–80% of patients with grade 4 encephalopathy and is often fatal. It may result in
paroxysmal hypertension, dilated pupils, sustained ankle clonus and sometimes decerebrate posturing (papilloedema is
usually absent). Intracranial pressure (ICP) should be maintained below 25 mmHg. To avoid raised ICP.
Table 42.4  (Continued )
Table 42.5  Criteria for transplantation in acute liver failure (ALF) (King’s College Hospital)*.
ALF due to paracetamol poisoning
ALF due to non-paracetamol poisoning
•	 Arterial pH <7.3 after volume resuscitation
•	 INR >6.5 Or any three of the following features:
•	 International normalized ratio (INR) >6.5
•	 Non-A, non-B viral hepatitis, drug-induced,
Wilson or indeterminate aetiology of ALF
•	 Creatinine >300 μmol/L
•	 Time from jaundice to encephalopathy >7 days
•	 Grade 3 or 4 encephalopathy
•	 Age <10 or >40
•	 INR >3.5
•	 Serum bilirubin >200 micromol/L
Absolute contraindication to transplantation
Relative contraindications to transplantation
•	 Extrahepatic malignancy
•	 Age >70
•	 Irreversible brain injury
•	 Active alcohol/substance misuse
•	 Advanced cardiopulmonary disease
•	 Severe psychiatric disorder
•	 Cholangiocarcinoma
•	 Portal vein thrombosis
•	 Pulmonary hypertension
* Contraindications (absolute or relative) should not preclude transfer to a Liver Unit.
SBP is defined as ascitic fluid with >250 white blood cells/mm3 of which >75% are polymorphs

<!-- page:330 -->
Acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver disease
311
•	 If there is suspicion of SBP, commence antibiotic treatment with a third-generation cephalosporin, for
example Cefuroxime 1 g 8-hourly IV while your ascitic tap results are pending.
•	 Once confirmed, continue IV antibiotics for five days, followed by a quinolone PO for five days.
•	 SBP should also be treated with HAS (20%), giving 1.5 g/kg of HAS on day 1 and 1 g/kg of HAS on day 3
(100 mL of 20% HAS = 20 g).
•	 Consider secondary prophylaxis for SBP in these patients on discharge.
•	 A rectal examination must be performed to exclude melaena. Evaluation and management of acute upper
and lower gastrointestinal bleeding is described in Chapters 38 and 39.
Other considerations
1	 Reduce the intestinal nitrogenous load
•	 Lactulose 10–30 mL, 2–3× per day, aiming for at least two soft stool motions per day
2	 Optimise nutrition
•	 Early inpatient dietetic review.
•	 Advise to eat little and often, every 2–3 h with a bedtime snack, to prevent a hypercatabolic state, and to
adhere to a low-salt diet, particularly if there are ascites.
•	 Low threshold to consider enteral feeding via nasogastric tube if there are any barriers to eating and
drinking (e.g. hepatic encephalopathy).
•	 Monitor re-feeding electrolytes and replace as needed. Consider starting intravenous Pabrinex (vitamin B
complex), two pairs twice a day.
3	 Maintain blood glucose >4.0 mmol/L
4	 Fluid balance
In the absence of renal impairment and/or infection, treat ascites with spironolactone combined with a loop
diuretic if necessary, aiming for weight loss of 0.5 kg/day. If ascites is refractory to diuretic therapy, use paracentesis with IV infusion of 100 mL of 20% HAS. See Chapter 36 for further management of ascites.
5	 Thromboprophylaxis
Patients remain at high risk of venous thromboembolism even when prothrombin time is prolonged,
prescribe low-molecular-weight heparin prophylaxis unless there is active bleeding or the platelet count is
<50 × 109/L.
6	 Medications
Avoid sedatives and opioids. Other drugs that are contraindicated are listed in the British National
Formulary.
7	 Seek advice on further management from a hepatologist or gastroenterologist.
Table 42.6  Precipitants of decompensated chronic liver disease.
Intercurrent infection, especially spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (Chapter 36)
Acute gastrointestinal bleeding (variceal and non-variceal) (Chapter 38)
Drugs: diuretics, hypnotics, sedatives and opioid analgesics
Alcoholic hepatitis
Viral hepatitis
Major surgery and anaesthesia
Liver ischaemia secondary to hypotension
Acute portal vein thrombosis or Budd–Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein obstruction)
Hypokalaemia and hypoglycaemia
Constipation
Development of hepatocellular carcinoma
No cause apparent (in up to 40% of patients)

<!-- page:331 -->
312
Acute Medicine
Hepatorenal syndrome
Definition
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a type of renal failure in patients with acute or chronic liver disease with
portal hypertension, usually in the setting of marked abnormalities in arterial circulation which lead to renal
hypoperfusion. It is usually made after other causes of acute kidney injury (AKI) have been excluded
(see Chapter 86).
Background
HRS occurs in around 20–25% of patients with ALF and decompensated chronic liver disease. SBP (Chapter 36)
is complicated by AKI in 30–40% of cases and is a common precipitant of HRS.
Diagnosis
AKI (see Chapter 86 for definition and staging)
Exclusion of other causes of AKI
No or minimal proteinuria
Normal or near-normal urine microscopy
Urine sodium concentration <10  mmol/L (if not taking diuretic); urine osmolality greater than plasma
osmolality
Failure of renal function to improve after withdrawal of diuretics and with volume expansion with HAS 1 g/kg
(up to 100 g) IV daily for two days.
Management
Seek advice from a hepatologist
Treat the underlying liver disease
Exclude/treat SBP (Chapter 36)
General management of AKI (Chapter 86)
Consider treatment with terlipressin (0.5–2.0 mg IV every 4–12 h) for 5–15 days plus human albumin solution,
1 g/kg (up to 100 g) IV on days 1 and 2, followed by 20–40 g daily, for 5–15 days.
Further reading
Baekdal M, Ytting H, Larsen FS. (2016) Acute liver failure. J Hepatol Gastroint Dis 2(3). (open access).
Bernal W, Wendon J. (2013) Acute liver failure. N Engl J Med 369, 2525–2534.
Bernal W, Jalan R, Quaglia A, et al. (2015) Acute on chronic liver failure. Lancet 386, 1576–1587.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016) Cirrhosis in over 16s: assessment and management
NICE guideline (NG50). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng50.
Wijdicks EFM. (2016) Hepatic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med 375, 1660–1670.
