# CHAPTER 47 Adrenal disorders

- Pages: 350-356
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:350 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
331
Acute adrenal insufficiency/adrenal crisis
Consider this diagnosis in any patient with unexplained hypotension and suggestive clinical features
(Table 47.1), particularly if not responsive to initial fluid resuscitation. Prompt recognition and glucocorticoid
replacement may be a life-saving treatment in a critically unwell patient, and should not be delayed while
awaiting test results.
Acute adrenal insufficiency most commonly occurs as an acute exacerbation of an underlying chronic or
subacute insufficiency, triggered by concomitant illness such as infection.
Underlying conditions
Primary adrenal insufficiency is caused by loss of function of the adrenal gland itself, for example due to
autoimmune-mediated destruction of adrenocortical tissue or surgical removal of the adrenal glands or due to
inborn disruption of adrenal cortisol production in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Also due to infection
(Tuberculosis, infiltration (sarcoidosis, lymphoma, metastasis, etc) and adrenolytic drugs (metyropone, ketoconazole, mitotane, etc)
Adrenal disorders
Zaw Ye Htet
CHAPTER 47
Table 47.1  Clinical features of adrenal insufficiency.
Primary (Addison’s disease) and secondary adrenal insufficiency
Tiredness, weakness, anorexia, weight loss
Hypotension/postural hypotension or dizziness
Nausea, vomiting
Hyponatraemia, hypoglycaemia, mild normocytic anaemia, lymphocytosis, eosinophilia
Primary adrenal insufficiency and associated disorders only
Hyperpigmentation, especially in areas exposed to mechanical shear stress: palmar crease, knuckles, scar, oral mucosa
Hyperkalaemia
Vitiligo
Autoimmune thyroid disease
Secondary adrenal insufficiency and associated disorders only
Pale skin without marked anaemia
Amenorrhea, decreased libido and potency
Scanty axillary and pubic hair
Small testicles
Secondary hypothyroidism
Headache, visual symptoms
Features of AVP deficiency (diabetes insipidus): Polyuria, loss of ability to concentrate urine

<!-- page:351 -->
332
Acute Medicine
Secondary adrenal insufficiency is caused if the regulation of adrenal cortisol production by the pituitary
is compromised, for example due to pituitary tumour, infection (Tuberculosis), infiltration (neurosarcoidosis,
haemochromatosis etc), hypophysitis (IgG4, checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy etc), pituitary apoplexy,
Sheehan’s Syndrome, previous pituitary surgery or radiotherapy, abrupt withdrawal of long-term exogenous
corticosteroid treatment (prednisolone >5 mg daily or equivalent for ≥four weeks).
In secondary adrenal insufficiency, haemodynamic compromise may not be accompanied by typical electrolyte disturbance as aldosterone is unaffected.
Priorities
In the patient presenting with acute circulatory collapse and suspected adrenal insufficiency (Tables  47.1
and 47.2), the following goals should be achieved in the first hour of treatment:
•	 Rapid assessment of airway, breathing, circulation and conscious level in a high dependency or critical care
environment, with continuous monitoring of heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen saturation.
•	 Airway management if the airway is compromised or the Glasgow Coma Scale score is less than 8.
•	 Supplemental oxygen if needed to maintain oxygen saturation >94%.
•	 Intravenous access, with blood sent for urgent investigations (Table 47.3).
•	 Fluid resuscitation with normal saline to correct the volume deficit.
•	 Place a bladder catheter for monitoring of urine output.
•	 Look for a MedicAlert® or similar bracelet/necklace as this may reveal the diagnosis.
•	 Give hydrocortisone (immediate bolus injection of 100 mg hydrocortisone IV or IM followed by continuous
intravenous infusion of 200 mg hydrocortisone per 24 h (alternatively 50 mg hydrocortisone per IV or IM
injection every 6 h). Fludrocortisone is not required in addition, as this dose of hydrocortisone has sufficient
mineralocorticoid action.
•	 Give a broad-spectrum antibiotic after taking blood and urine for culture, in case the trigger is infection.
•	 If the patient is well enough, take a detailed history of the symptoms of adrenal insufficiency and
commonly associated disorders (Table 47.1). Look for clinical signs, especially hyperpigmentation suggestive of elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), to differentiate primary from secondary adrenal
insufficiency. Hyperpigmentation is best seen over the palmar creases, knuckles, old scars and the oral
mucosa.
Once stabilized, transfer the patient to an appropriate care area.
Table 47.2  Urgent investigation in suspected acute adrenal insufficiency.
Urea, creatinine, sodium, potassium and glucose*
Venous blood gas and lactate
Plasma cortisol (in patients not already known to have adrenal failure)
Plasma corticotrophin (ACTH) in patients not already known to have adrenal failure (taken in EDTA tube, for later
analysis; transport immediately to the laboratory for freezing)
Thyroid function tests
Full blood count
Coagulation screen
C-reactive protein
Blood culture
Urine microscopy and culture
Chest X-ray
ECG
* Typical biochemical findings in acute adrenal insufficiency are raised creatinine, low sodium (120–130 mmol/L), raised
potassium in primary adrenal insufficiency (5–7 mmol/L), low glucose.

<!-- page:352 -->
Adrenal disorders
333
Further management
Steroid replacement
•	 If in doubt, hydrocortisone replacement should continue until adrenal sufficiency can be conclusively
confirmed or excluded. In the acutely unwell patient, give hydrocortisone 50 mg 6-hourly IV or IM.
•	 After treatment of any underlying concomitant illness and when the patient is feeling well, parenteral hydrocortisone can be stepped down to a double-physiological dose of oral hydrocortisone, approximately 40 mg
daily in divided doses. When completely recovered, physiological replacement can commence.
•	 Mineralocorticoid replacement for primary adrenal insufficiency is normally achieved with a dose of
fludrocortisone 50–200 μgm PO once daily and is started at 100 μgm. Adequacy of dose can be assessed by
an absence of clinical signs of hypovolaemia (e.g. postural hypotension) and normal electrolytes.
Making the patient safe for discharge
•	 Educating the patient on what to do in the presence of acute illness is of paramount importance and may
be a life-saving intervention. Patient information resources can be found and reproduced free of charge at
the website of the Addison’s Disease Self-help Group, www.addisonsdisease.org.uk, and are based on the
advice of an expert panel.
•	 Patients should be advised:
•	 Sick day rule 1: the need to double daily oral glucocorticoid dose during illness with fever that requires bed
rest and/or antibiotics
Table 47.3  Short tetracosactrin (Synacthen) test.
•	 The test should be done when the patient has recovered from acute illness, as glucocorticoid (but not fludrocortisone)
must be hold before the test. Final dose of hydrocortisone should be at midday, on the day prior to the test. If on,
prednisolone, the dose in the morning of the test should be delayed till after the test, so no dose needs to be omitted
before the test.
•	 The patient should be resting quietly but need not fast prior to the test. Tetracosactide may exacerbate bronchospasm
in those with asthma. Oestrogens, for example in oral contraceptives, should be stopped six weeks before the test.
•	 Give 250 μgm of tetracosactide IV or IM before 10 am. Measure plasma cortisol immediately before, and 30 and
60 min after the injection. Baseline plasma ACTH should also be measured.
•	 With normal adrenal function, the baseline plasma cortisol is over 140 nmol/L, and the 30 or 60-min level is over
500 nmol/L and at least 200 nmol/L above the baseline level. (note: cut-off values are dependent on the assay used
check local values with your laboratory)
•	 In patients with primary hypoadrenalism, tetracosactrin does not stimulate cortisol secretion, because the adrenal
cortex is already maximally stimulated by endogenous corticotropin. In severe secondary hypoadrenalism, plasma
cortisol does not increase because of adrenocortical atrophy. However, in secondary hypoadrenalism which is
mild or of recent onset, the test may be normal.
•	 Adrenal insufficiency can be a difficult diagnosis to make in an acutely unwell patient as the diagnostic tests are not valid in this population and apparently normal plasma cortisol level may not be
appropriately elevated for the degree of metabolic stress present.
•	 Delay in administration of high-dose glucocorticoid leads to excess morbidity and mortality in critically unwell patients with adrenal insufficiency.
•	 Newly diagnosed patients with adrenal insufficiency require careful education regarding sick-day
rules and may need an emergency injection pack and training before discharge.
Box 47.1  Acute adrenal insufficiency – alerts.

<!-- page:353 -->
334
Acute Medicine
•	 Sick day rule 2: the need to administer glucocorticoids per IV or IM injection during prolonged vomiting or
diarrhoea, during preparation for colonoscopy or in case of acute trauma or surgery
•	 Teach the patient and partner/parents how to self-administer and inject hydrocortisone and provide them
with a Hydrocortisone Emergency Injection kit (100 mg hydrocortisone sodium succinate for injection;
hyperlink to ADSHG and Pit foundation where there are picture tutorials on using this); check regularly that
their kit is up to date.
•	 If a cause of permanent adrenal insufficiency is confirmed, the patient should be strongly advised to wear
an identity bracelet to alert health-care professionals to their condition and potential need for immediate
hydrocortisone in the event of an emergency.
Confirming the diagnosis
When well, definitive determination of adrenal status can be sought. If primary adrenal insufficiency is suspected
(ACTH elevated at presentation), a short Synacthen test is done (Table 47.3). Alternative investigations (e.g. an
insulin stress test) may be necessary for secondary adrenal insufficiency; seek advice from an endocrinologist.
Determining the cause
•	 If primary adrenal insufficiency is confirmed, further investigations such as adrenal autoantibodies and imaging of adrenal glands are required to elucidate the aetiology. Seek advice from an endocrinologist.
•	 If secondary adrenal insufficiency is identified, a thorough search for a history of exogenous steroid is the
first step. Inhaled and topical steroids can be absorbed systemically in sufficient quantities to result in adrenal
insufficiency if stopped abruptly. Glucocorticoids are also found in commercially available skin-lightening
creams and are a common cause of Cushing’s syndrome (followed by adrenal insufficiency after cessation)
in certain demographic groups.
•	 In the absence of exogenous steroid, first-line investigations are directed at the pituitary gland. Seek advice
from an endocrinologist.
Phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma crisis
•	 Phaeochromocytomas/paragangliomas are tumours of chromatin cells, derived from neural crest tissues. They
most commonly occur in the adrenal medulla in which instance they are called phaeochromocytomas.
•	 They often secrete catecholamines (adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine) but may secrete other hormones as well.
•	 Usually present between the ages of 20 and 50 years, with earlier presentation increasing the likelihood that
they are due to a genetic syndrome.
•	 They can present with life-threatening catecholamine-induced crises (Table 47.4).
Table 47.4  When to consider a catecholamine-induced crisis.
Severe hypertension
Headache, palpitation and sweating
Acute pulmonary oedema
Acute regional ischaemia (limb/mesenteric)
Encephalopathy with hypertension
Acute chest pain with hypertension
Heart failure with hypertension
Acute kidney injury with hypertension
Any acute presentation in a patient with known genetic associate: neurofibromatosis, von Hippel-Lindau, MEN 2,
previous paraganglioma (SDH mutation)

<!-- page:354 -->
Adrenal disorders
335
•	 Crises may be triggered by administration of drugs, such as dopamine antagonists, tricyclic antidepressants,
radiocontrast media or anaesthetic agents.
•	 Manipulation of the tumour is likely to trigger a crisis in a patient without sufficient alpha-adrenergic blockade and exclusion of catecholamine excess is necessary prior to surgery on any tumour located at a site typical for paraganglioma and phaeochromocytoma.
•	 Usually, sporadic but are also associated with several genetic syndromes including multiple endocrine neoplasia (type 2A or 2B), von Hippel-Lindau disease, succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) mutations and neurofibromatosis type 1.
Priorities
In the patient presenting with a suspected catecholamine-induced crisis (Table  47.4), the following goals
should be achieved in the first hour of treatment:
•	 Rapid assessment of airway, breathing, circulation and conscious level in a high dependency or critical care
environment, with continuous monitoring of heart rate, blood pressure and arterial oxygen saturation.
Consider an arterial line for invasive monitoring.
•	 Airway management if the airway is compromised or the Glasgow Coma Scale score is less than 8.
•	 Supplemental oxygen if needed to maintain SaO2 >94%.
•	 Intravenous access with blood sent for urgent investigations (Table 47.5).
•	 Assess for organ failure:
•	 Cardiovascular: arrhythmias, heart failure, ischaemic stroke, intracranial bleed, vasospastic peripheral
ischaemia, myocardial infarction, aortic dissection or aneurysmal rupture
•	 Respiratory: pulmonary oedema
•	 Neurological: encephalopathy
•	 Renal: acute kidney injury
•	 Haematological: disseminated intravascular coagulation
•	 In the absence of organ failure, see further management for advice on commencing alpha blockade with
oral phenoxybenzamine. If organ failure is present, intravenous alpha blockade may be necessary.
Phentolamine is the preferred agent, delivered as a slow IV bolus 5–15 mg every 5–15 min as necessary (after
the initial test dose of 1 mg) or continuous infusion (100 mg in 500 mL of 5% dextrose water and rate
titrated with blood pressure monitoring via an arterial line. Caution is required; the circulating volume may
be substantially reduced as a physiological response to increased vascular resistance. When reversed rapidly,
Table 47.5  Investigation of suspected catecholamine-induced crisis.
Urgent
ECG
Echocardiography
Chest X-ray
Arterial blood gases, pH and lactate (high lactate not necessarily indicative of ischaemic tissue, may be raised by direct
effect of catecholamines on cellular metabolism)
Blood metadrenaline, normetadrenaline and dopamine concentration
Full blood count
Coagulation screen
Biochemical profile
Triple-phase adrenal CT scan (or in and out of phase adrenal MRI)
Later
Base of skull to pelvis imaging if adrenal imaging negative
Nuclear medicine imaging (123 I-mIBG)
Further investigation to be directed by neuroendocrine tumour multidisciplinary team

<!-- page:355 -->
336
Acute Medicine
a dramatic fall in blood pressure may ensue. Intravenous alpha blockade must be accompanied by aggressive
intravenous filling to replace this missing volume as the arterial resistance falls.
•	 Identify the precipitant and commence appropriate management.
•	 Common ITU interventions to be avoided: Labetalol for BP control (at least not as initial therapy) and noradrenergic inotropic support.
•	 Involve a specialist endocrinology team at the earliest opportunity.
Further management
Biochemical confirmation
If organ failure is not present, confirmation of pathological elevation of catecholamines should be sought by
measuring catecholamines or their metabolites (metanephrines) in the urine or blood. Plasma metanephrine
levels are the most specific of these tests and less susceptible to the effects of intercurrent illness than levels of
adrenaline or noradrenaline themselves. The vast majority of paragangliomas will secrete one or both of these
hormones, pure dopamine-secreting paragangliomas are very rare.
Imaging
Dedicated cross-sectional imaging (CT or MRI) of the adrenal glands should be undertaken to localize the
tumour. If negative, imaging from neck to pelvis is required.
Functional imaging is also useful as it may identify metastases and/or confirm uptake of a tracer by
malignant paragangliomas, which may then be utilized in targeted radiotherapy should this be necessary
post-surgery (peptide-receptor radionuclide therapy).
131I-meta-IodoBenzylGuanidine (mIBG) is most
commonly used.
Adrenergic blockade
Alpha blockade using phenoxybenzamine at an initial dose of 10 mg 12-hourly PO should be initiated once the
diagnosis is confirmed. This carries a risk of inducing profound hypotension and is best undertaken as an inpatient. This allows for more rapid up-titration of the dose and more accurate fluid replacement as the degree of
alpha blockade increases. The dose is sequentially increased until normotension is achieved or adverse effects
(chiefly nasal congestion and postural hypotension) become intolerable.
Beta blockade to control tachycardia or tachyarrhythmia only to be commenced once adequate alpha blockade is in place.
There is no specific consensus on blood pressure and heart rate targets; however, it is recommended to reach
a seated blood pressure target <130/80 mmHg. Targets for heart rate should be 60–70 bpm in a seated and
70–80 bpm in an upright position, respectively.
Multidisciplinary management
Early involvement of the surgical team to plan surgery is important, and management of paragangliomas/
phaeochromocytomas is best under a multidisciplinary team of endocrinologists, endocrine surgeons, radiologists and nuclear medicine physicians.
Consider a genetic syndrome
In those with a family history or who are aged <60, the possibility of a genetic syndrome should be considered.
Evidence of neurofibromatosis type 1 (café-au-lait spots, cutaneous neurofibromata), multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (medullary thyroid cancer, hyperparathyroidism) or type 2B (as for type 2A plus Marfanoid habitus, and mucosal ganglioneuromas) and von Hippel Lindau (haemangioblastoma, renal cell cancer, pancreatic
islet cell tumours) should be sought.
If genetic testing confirms a diagnosis of these conditions or of SDH mutation, appropriate cascade screening of family members is necessary and referral to a clinical geneticist is required.

<!-- page:356 -->
Adrenal disorders
337
Genetic testing criteria for inherited phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma
excluding NF1
Testing of individual (proband) affected with disease where the individual +/− family history meets one of the
following criteria. The proband has:
1	 Phaeochromocytoma <60 years, OR
2	 Any paraganglioma OR metastatic phaeochromocytoma at any age, OR
3	 3.Phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma with loss of staining for SDH proteins on IHC, OR
4	 Bilateral phaeochromocytoma (any age), OR
5	 Phaeochromocytoma and renal cell carcinoma (any age), OR
6	 Phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma (any age) AND ≥1 relative (first/second/third degree relative) with
phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma/renal cell cancer (any age)/gastrointestinal stromal tumour
Further reading
Charmandari E, Nicolaides NC, Chrousos GP. (2014) Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet 383, 2152–2167.
Lenders JWM, Duh Q-Y, Graeme Eisenhofer G, et al. (2014) Phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99, 1915–1942.
Society for Endocrinology (2016). Endocrine Emergency Guidance. Emergency management of acute adrenal
insufficiency (adrenal crisis) in adult patients. http://www.endocrineconnections.com/content/5/5/G1.
