# CHAPTER 49 Thyroid emergencies

- Pages: 362-369
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:362 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
343
Thyroid storm
The diagnosis of thyroid storm should be considered in any patient with fever, abnormal mental state, sinus
tachycardia or atrial fibrillation, who may have signs of thyrotoxicosis.
•	 Thyroid storm is an acute life-threatening metabolic emergency caused by extremely high levels of thyroid
hormone activity and is characterized by exaggerated manifestations of thyrotoxicosis.
•	 It usually occurs in inadequately treated thyrotoxic patients often triggered by severe stress and manifested
by decompensation of multiple organs.
•	 It is associated with a high mortality rate (20%) if not treated promptly.
•	 If the diagnosis is suspected, antithyroid treatment must be started before biochemical confirmation.
Adequate beta blockade to neutralize the associated autonomic overdrive is also essential.
•	 It is important to note that Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) levels do not distinguish thyroid storm from
thyrotoxicosis.
Thyrotoxicosis is the syndrome resulting from supranormal thyroid hormone activity, and is usually the result
of hyperthyroidism, defined as increased thyroid hormone production by the native thyroid gland. Causes are
summarized in Table 49.1.
Priorities
Is this thyroid storm?
•	 The diagnosis of thyroid storm is clinical, and rests on the identification of actual or impending decompensation of organ function due to thyrotoxicosis (Table 49.2).
•	 The most common system used to help diagnose thyroid storm early is the Burch–Wartofsky score. Using this
system, the following criteria must be met:
•	 Elevated Free T3 (FT3) and/or Free T4 (FT4)
•	 At least one CNS manifestation- restlessness, delirium, psychosis, lethargy or coma
•	 One or more other symptoms
•	 Fever 38 °C or higher
•	 Tachycardia (130 bpm or more/ Afib)
•	 Heart failure – pulmonary edema (NYHA class III or IV)
•	 Gastrointestinal dysfunction
Thyroid emergencies
Geetha Bhat and Michelle Stefanelli
CHAPTER 49

<!-- page:363 -->
344
Acute Medicine
•	 Can also meet diagnostic criteria with labs indicative of thyrotoxicosis plus 3 or more other non-CNS
manifestations
•	 Elderly patients may not show typical symptoms of thyrotoxicosis and hepatic manifestations (nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea)
What has triggered the thyroid storm?
•	 Thyroid storm may occur in the course of the natural history of an underlying thyrotoxic process but is more
often related to decompensation caused by an intercurrent precipitating illness. This is most frequently an
infection but may also be surgery (particularly thyroid surgery or occasionally non-thyroid surgery), other
critical illness or childbirth.
•	 Other iatrogenic causes include radioactive iodine therapy in patients with insufficiently controlled hyperthyroidism, abrupt cessation of antithyroid medications (usually due to non-adherence), administration of
iodine-containing pharmaceuticals (e.g. amiodarone or contrast agents), or induction of anesthesia.
Immediate management and stabilization
Thyroid storm is an acutely life-threatening condition and must be managed in a higher dependency setting
(resuscitation area/ HDU/ICU). The immediate management priorities in the first hour are:
•	 Rapid assessment of airway, breathing, circulation and level of consciousness. Continuous monitoring of
blood pressure, heart rate and ECG.
•	 Airway management by experienced staff if the airway is compromised or the Glasgow Coma Scale score is
less than 8.
•	 Supplemental oxygen as needed, to maintain arterial oxygen saturation 94–96%.
•	 Hemodynamic stabilization. Hypotension may be due to high output cardiac failure or a compromising
tachyarrhythmia (usually supraventricular). DC cardioversion may well be unsuccessful for A.Fib in a severely
Table 49.1  Causes of hyperthyroidism.*
Autoimmune
Graves’ disease**
Hashitoxicosis
Postpartum thyroiditis
Immune check point inhibitor
Infectious
Use of immune check point inhibitor
Subacute thyroiditis
Pyogenic thyroiditis
Nodular
Solitary adenoma
Toxic multinodular goiter
Neoplastic
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma (rare, mostly follicular)
Secondary
TSHoma
Thyroid hormone resistance
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Hydatidiform mole/choriocarcinoma
Destructive
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis type 2 (AIT-2)
Trauma
Irradiation
Lithium
Iodine excess
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis type 1 (AIT-1)
(Jod-Basedow phenomenon)
Iodine contrast
Dietary (moving from iodine deficient to iodine rich area)
* Other causes are oversupply of exogenous thyroid hormone in patients taking levothyroxine or other thyroid
supplements, and very rarely, ectopic thyroid hormone production by an ovarian teratoma (struma ovarii).
** Pathognomonic features of Graves’ disease include the presence of thyroid eye disease, pretibial myxedema,
thyroid acropachy, or a bruit over the enlarged thyroid gland.

<!-- page:364 -->
Thyroid emergencies
345
Table 49.2  Burch and Wartofsky score for diagnosis of thyrotoxic storm in a patient with elevated thyroid levels
Criteria
Points
Thermoregulatory dysfunction
Temperature
Less than 37.2 °C (99.0 °F)
0
37.2–37.7 °C (99.0–99.9 °F)
5
37.8–38.2 °C (100.0–100.9 °F)
10
38.3–38.8 °C (101.0–101.9 °F)
15
38.9–39.3 °C (102.0–102.9 °F)
20
39.4–39.9 °C (103.0–103.9 °F)
25
40.0 °C or higher (104 °F or higher)
30
Cardiovascular
Heart rate
Less than 100
0
100–109
5
110–119
10
120–129
15
130–139
20
140 or higher
25
Atrial fibrillation
Absent
0
Present
10
Congestive heart failure
Absent
0
Mild
5
Moderate
10
Severe
20
Gastrointestinal/hepatic dysfunction
Manifestation
Absent
0
Moderate (diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting)
10
Severe (jaundice)
20
Central nervous system disturbance
Manifestation
Absent
0
Mild (agitation)
10
Moderate (delirium, psychosis, extreme lethargy)
20
Severe (seizure/coma)
30
Precipitant history
Status
Present
0
Absent
10
Interpretation
Total score
Interpretation
<25
Thyrotoxic storm unlikely
25–45
Impending thyrotoxic storm
>45
Thyrotoxic storm confirmed
Source: Burch HB, Wartofsky L (1993) Life-threatening hyperthyroidism: thyroid storm. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
22, 263–277. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

<!-- page:365 -->
346
Acute Medicine
hyperthyroid patient. Unless there is clinical suspicion of underlying cardiomyopathy, rate-related failure
may be managed with a short-acting beta blocker (e.g. IV esmolol) with prompt withdrawal if clinical state
worsens. Patient with thyroid storm and heart failure to be managed in an intensive care environment, with
continuous BP and CVP monitoring.
•	 Assessment for common precipitants of thyroid storm: sepsis, diabetic ketoacidosis, or myocardial infarction
(see above). If identified, appropriate management should be initiated. When no precipitating factor is
apparent, broad-spectrum antibiotics are warranted until intercurrent infection has been excluded. Other
precipitating causes can be managed in the usual manner.
•	 Cooling measures should be employed to correct fever, initially with paracetamol (acetaminophen)
1000 mg PO/IV.
•	 Transfer to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for further management.
Further management
The treatment of thyroid storm can be broken down into categories based on the effect on thyroid hormone. The
management is directed towards blocking further production of thyroid hormone, blocking its release, blocking
conversion of the inactive T4 to active T3 and limiting the adrenergic effects of high thyroid hormone activity.
Eventually all patients will need definitive therapy which is either radioactive iodine ablation or thyroidectomy.
Refer to Table 49.3 for additional information on route and dosing of medications.
•	 Thionamides are initiated to prevent production of new thyroid hormone. Propylthiouracil is the preferred
agent due to its additional benefit in reducing peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. Due to Propylthiouracil’s
association with fulminant hepatitis, a rare but potentially fatal complication, methimazole should be
considered in those with known liver disease. These medications are given orally or via a feeding tube. Rectal
and IV formulations may be considered when the oral route is contraindicated.
•	 Beta blockers should be used to negate the catecholaminergic effects of thyrotoxicosis. In the setting of acute
thyrotoxic storm for rapid onset of action and inability to take oral medications, intravenous esmolol should be
used. Consider an arterial line for continuous blood pressure monitoring if IV beta blockers are initiated. The
dose is titrated according to cardiovascular parameters. Once the patient is stable and able to tolerate oral medications, propranolol is the preferred agent given its additional capacity to block peripheral T4 to T3 conversion.
•	 Glucocorticoids in the form of IV hydrocortisone are critical in supporting circulation and reducing the
peripheral effects of thyroid hormone by decreasing peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.
•	 Therapy against thyroid hormone release such as ‘Cold’ iodine (i.e. non-radioactive iodine) can be administered in the form of Lugol’s solution (5% elemental iodine, 10% potassium iodide in distilled water) or a
saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI) diluted in water. These make use of the Wolff-Chaikoff effect
in which high doses of iodine result in a blockade of the incorporation of iodine into thyroglobulin. This
should be administered at least 1 hour after administration of thionamides to prevent the iodine from being
used as substrate. Effectiveness of iodine solutions is time-limited to around ten days, after which the thyroid
escapes this effect by down-regulating iodine transporters.
•	 Finally, thyroid hormone clearance can be enhanced through using medications such as cholestyramine.
•	 In extreme treatment refractory thyrotoxicosis, plasmapheresis has been used to clear circulating thyroid
hormones to allow a window for emergency thyroidectomy to be performed safely.
Myxoedema coma
At the opposite end of the spectrum to thyroid storm lies the rare endocrine emergency of myxoedema coma,
which has a prevalence of less than 1 per million per year, and is largely a disease of the elderly. The physical
signs of hypothermia from whatever cause closely resemble those of myxoedema coma; however, if there is

<!-- page:366 -->
Thyroid emergencies
347
other evidence of hypothyroidism, then thyroid hormone and hydrocortisone prior (in case there is coexisting
autoimmune adrenal insufficiency) should be given. Even with treatment, mortality is high as 25%.
Priorities
Is this myxoedema coma?
•	 Hypothermia and altered mental status are the cardinal features (although most patients are not actually
comatose, i.e. Glasgow Coma Scale score <8).
•	 A history of hypothyroidism, previous radioactive iodine treatment, thyroidectomy (look for scar on neck),
and proceeding symptoms of hypothyroidism (weight gain with reduced appetite, dry skin and hair loss) are
indications that myxedema coma should be considered.
•	 Bradycardia, bradypnea, hypoxemia and hypotension are common.
•	 Hyponatremia, hypercapnia, hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia and elevated creatinine kinase are often present.
Table 49.3  Therapy for thyroid storm.
Therapy against new thyroid hormone
production – Thionamides
Dose/route/frequency for loading and
maintenance
Propylthiouracil
PO loading dose of 500–1000 mg followed by
250 mg every 4 h
OR
Rectal dose of 400–600 mg every 6 h
Methimazole
IV 10–30 mg every 8–6 h
OR
PO 60–120 mg/day in 4–6 doses
OR
Rectal 20–40 mg every 8–6 h
Carbimazole
PO 20–30 mg every 4–6 h
Therapy blocking the catecholaminergic affects
Esmolol
IV loading dose of 250–500 mcg/kg followed by
50–100 mcg/kg/min
Propranolol
IV 0.5–1.0 mg over 10 min followed by
10–2.0 mg over 10 min every few hours
OR
PO 60–120 mg every 4–6 h
Glucocorticoids blocking peripheral conversion
Hydrocortisone
IV loading dose of 300 mg followed by
100 mg every 8 h
Therapy against thyroid hormone release
(administer at least 1 h after thionamide)
SSKI
PO 5 drops every 6 h
OR
Rectal 250–500 mg every 6 h
Lugol’s solution
PO 8 drops every 6 h
OR
Rectal 5–10 drops every 8–6 h (max 80 drops/day)
Sodium iodide
IV 0.5 g every 12 h
Lithium
PO 300 mg every 4–6 h
Therapy enhancing thyroid hormone clearance
Cholestyramine
1–4 g twice/day

<!-- page:367 -->
348
Acute Medicine
•	 It is important to note that the degree of TSH elevation may not indicate the severity of hypothyroidism,
as there may be variable suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.
•	 A diagnostic scoring system for myxedema coma can be useful in establishing a diagnosis (Table 49.4).
What has caused myxoedema coma?
•	 Myxedema coma is usually precipitated by an event causing an increased metabolic demand which outstrips
the adaptive mechanisms compensating for chronic hypothyroidism, such as infection or trauma.
•	 Other triggers include cold weather, sedative agents, general anesthesia, acute coronary syndrome, and stroke.
Immediate management
•	 ABCDE assessment
•	 Airway: may be compromised by oedema of the upper respiratory tract structures. Airway adjuncts or
intubation may be required.
•	 Breathing: ventilatory failure is common and should be confirmed with arterial blood gas analysis. Assisted
ventilation is often necessary for the first 24–48 h.
•	 Circulation: cautious fluid resuscitation, bearing in mind the likely impairment of cardiac contractility, can
be employed. Glucocorticoids should be administered at least 1 h prior to thyroid hormone replacement
(50–100 mg every 6-h IV) as severe hypothyroidism may impair ACTH response to stress. The possibility of
undiagnosed autoimmune adrenal insufficiency as a comorbidity must be recognized and treated promptly
to prevent precipitating acute adrenal crisis. Correct hypoglycemia using intravenous glucose
•	 Identify the precipitant and initiate treatment. Investigation needed urgently is given in Table 49.5.
•	 Infection may be occult and sepsis is unlikely to be accompanied by an elevated temperature. If in doubt,
administer broad spectrum antibiotics.
Table 49.4  A score >60 highly suggestive/diagnostic of myxedema coma. A score 25–59 supportive of diagnosis
of myxedema coma. A score <25 myxedema coma unlikely.
Thermoregulatory dysfunction
(temperature °F/°C)
Points
Cardiovascular dysfunction
Points
>95/35
0
Bradycardia/Heart rate (beats/min)
89.6–95/32–35
10
Absent
  0
<89.6/32 20
20
50–59
10
40–49
20
Central nervous system effects
<40
30
Absent
0
Somnolent/Lethargy
10
ECG changes (QT prolongation, BBB,
low voltage, heart block, ST changes)
10
Obtunded
15
Pericardial/pleural effusion
19
Stupor
20
Pulmonary edema
15
Coma/seizures
30
Cardiomegaly
15
Hypotension
20
Gastrointestinal findings
Anorexia/abdominal pain/constipation
5
Metabolic disturbances
Decreased intestinal motility
15
Hyponatremia
10
Paralytic ileus
20
Hypoglycemia
10
Hypoxemia
10
Precipitating event
Hypercarbia
10
Absent
0
Decrease in GFR
10
Present
10

<!-- page:368 -->
Thyroid emergencies
349
•	 The ECG will be abnormal and usually shows bradycardia, small voltage QRS complexes and flattened or
inverted T-waves. Varying degrees of heart block may be present. Measure the QTc interval, which may be
prolonged, bringing a risk of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes; see Chapter 13).
Assess for evidence of myocardial ischemia or infarction.
•	 Cerebellar signs may be the result of severe hypothyroidism, but assess for evidence of an acute stroke.
•	 Assess for evidence of an upper gastrointestinal bleed.
•	 Obtain a collateral history: there will usually be a history of hypothyroidism, thyroid ablation, and/or
medication non-compliance.
•	 Review the drug history for new medications, which may have precipitated the acute presentation. Alert the
critical care team and transfer to an appropriate ICU.
Further management/thyroid hormone replacement
•	 Restoration of thyroid hormone activity is essential. There is no high-grade evidence to suggest how this is
best achieved, but initial replacement via the intravenous route is strongly recommended following the
administration of intravenous glucocorticoids if the concern for concurrent adrenal insufficiency has not
been ruled out.
•	 Restoring normal target tissue thyroid hormone activity as soon as possible to reverse life-threatening
disturbance of body systems must be weighed against the possibility of inducing fatal tachyarrhythmias with
rapid correction.
•	 Initial treatment should be with intravenous levothyroxine, with a loading dose of 200–400 mcg. For patients
who are older, smaller, or have a history of cardiovascular disease smaller doses should be considered, as the
associated rapid increase in thyroid hormone receptor signaling may induce adverse cardiac events.
•	 Following the initial loading dose, patients can be treated with oral levothyroxine at weight-based dosing of
1.6 mcg/kg per body weight. The dose should be reduced to 75% of the calculated dose with intravenous
administration.
•	 Administration of concurrent intravenous liothyronine at a loading dose of 5–20 mcg (followed by a dose of
2.5–10 mcg every 8 h) can be considered to combat the concern of decreased conversion to triiodothyronine
in patients with myxedema coma. This is a weak recommendation with low-quality evidence. This should be
dosed with caution as there is an association of high serum triiodothyronine with mortality.
•	 Once the patient improves clinically, treatment may be switched to oral therapy or another enteral route if
oral administration is not possible. Treatment with liothyronine could be discontinued.
Table 49.5  Urgent investigation in suspected myxedema coma.
Blood glucose
Creatinine and electrolytes
Plasma calcium and phosphate
Liver function tests
Creatine kinase
Full blood count
C-reactive protein
Arterial pH, gases and lactate
Blood and urine culture
Thyroid function tests (TSH, free T4, free T3)
Plasma cortisol
ECG
Chest X-ray
CT head

<!-- page:369 -->
350
Acute Medicine
•	 Improvements in mental status, improved cardiac function, and pulmonary function can be expected
within a week. Measurements of thyroid hormone levels every 1–2 days showing improvement can be
reassuring. Failure of TSH to downtrend and thyroid hormone levels to improve may indicate a need for dosage
adjustments. High serum T3 levels may indicate a need to decrease dose, but the TSH may take weeks to
months to normalize completely. Over-replacement should be avoided as there is risk of tachyarrhythmias.
Supportive care
•	 Hypothermia should not be treated with active rewarming since this will induce peripheral vasodilatation,
negating the compensatory diversion of blood flow to the vital organs. Passive rewarming with a blanket is
preferred.
•	 Glucocorticoids should be continued until coexisting adrenal insufficiency (Chapter 47) has been excluded.
Once patient is clinically improved, a Cosyntropin stimulation test can be performed, obtaining cortisol levels
before and after administration of synthetic ACTH.
•	 Ongoing supportive management of organ failure (e.g. mechanical ventilation or vasopressors) while
awaiting response to thyroid hormone replacement is a key determinant of outcome. The time to recovery
may be variable depending on the duration of severe hypothyroidism. A multidisciplinary team approach
is essential in successful management of these thyroid emergencies.
Further reading
Chiong YV, Bammerlin E, Mariash CN. (2015) Development of an objective tool for the diagnosis of
myxedema coma. Transl Res 166, 233–243. DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.01.003.
De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. (2016) Hyperthyroidism. Lancet 388, 906–918.
Dixit S. (2014) A rare case of myxedema coma with neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). J Clin Diagn Res.
DOI: 10.7860/jcdr/2015/13008.5868.
Jonklaas J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al. (2014) Guidelines for the treatment of hypothyroidism: prepared by
the American thyroid association task force on thyroid hormone replacement. Thyroid 24(12), 1670–1751.
DOI: 10.1089/thy.2014.0028.
Matfin G, MSc (Oxon), MD ChB, FASCE, FACP (2014) A Clinician’s guide Endocrine and metabolic Medical
Emergencies 2014 by Endocrine society.
Sharp CS, Wilson MP, Nordstrom K. (2016) Psychiatric emergencies for clinicians: the Emergency Department
management of thyroid storm. J Emerg Med 51, 155–158.
