# CHAPTER 50 Parathyroid disorders

- Pages: 370-376
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:370 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
351
Hyperparathyroidism
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is one of the most common causes of hypercalcemia particularly in
ambulatory care settings. It is characterized by hypercalcemia due to autonomous overproduction of
parathyroid hormone (PTH) (Table 50.1).
The overwhelming majority of PHPT patients are asymptomatic and often diagnosed incidentally on routine
blood tests done for other medical indications. However, patients may present with symptoms of hypercalcaemia particularly when adjusted calcium is more than 3 mmol/L (Table 50.2, Figure 50.1).
Parathyroid crisis is a rare and potentially fatal complication of PHPT in which patients develop severe
symptoms and signs of hypercalcemia. It is characterized by a serum calcium level usually greater than 3.5 mmol/L
resulting from marked elevation of PTH with multiple organ dysfunction. It is associated with profound
dehydration and impaired renal function, gastrointestinal and psychological disturbances. Cardiac arrhythmias,
pancreatitis and neuromuscular disturbance can also occur. It is an endocrine emergency that requires aggressive
medical therapy and early surgical treatment.
PHPT is most commonly due to solitary adenoma (80%), less commonly due to four-gland hyperplasia or
multiple adenomas and very rarely due to parathyroid carcinoma (<1%). Although it is relatively rare, it can be
associated with germline mutation especially when diagnosed at a younger age or with multiple gland
involvement.
Parathyroid disorders
Aye Chan Maung and Christine J.H. May
CHAPTER 50
Table 50.1  Causes of hypercalcaemia.
PTH mediated
•	 Primary hyperparathyroidism (Sporadic or Familial)
•	 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (Positive family history and calcium/creatinine clearance ratio <0.01)
•	 Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (in advanced chronic kidney disease patients)
•	 Lithium induced
Non-PTH mediated
•	 Malignancy (bony metastases, humoral hypercalcaemia and multiple myeloma)
•	 Medications (thiazides, PTH analogues, vitamin A or D overdose)
•	 Endocrine diseases (hyperthyroidism, Addison’s disease, acromegaly and pheochromocytoma)
•	 Granulomatous diseases (sarcoidosis and tuberculosis)
•	 Miscellaneous (immobilisation and Milk alkali syndrome)

<!-- page:371 -->
352
Acute Medicine
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) can show a similar biochemical picture, but usually, the degree of
hypercalcemia and elevation in PTH are mild. Fractional excretion of urinary calcium is typically low (<1%) in FHH.
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism can manifest with raised PTH levels together with raised creatinine and
phosphate levels in patients with end-stage kidney disease.
Lithium alters the set point of calcium-sensing receptor at the parathyroid glands for PTH secretion and
induces parathyroid hyperplasia. The onset of hypercalcemia after initiation of lithium treatment could vary
from months to years.
Treatment considerations
•	 The initial management of severe hypercalcaemia includes intravascular volume expansion with intravenous
fluids, and parathyroidectomy if meeting surgical criteria (see below).
•	 Other treatment options depending on local protocols include subcutaneous calcitonin (if available) to
promote calciuresis, intravenous bisphosphonate to exert strong anti-osteoclastic action and cinacalcet.
Management of hypercalcaemia was discussed more detail in Chapter 52.
•	 The treatment of choice in symptomatic PHPT is parathyroid surgery (Table 50.3). Surgery remains the only
definitive treatment. Localization studies (Figure 50.2) can provide useful information to the endocrine
Table 50.2  Focused assessment in primary hyperparathyroidism patient.
History taking
Examination
Symptoms of hypercalcaemia (Ca > 3 mmol/L)
Fatigue, lethargy, muscle weakness
Polyuria, polydipsia
Depression, confusion
Constipation, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia
Complications of PHPT
Renal: Renal stones, nephrocalcinosis, renal impairment
Skeletal: Fragility fractures, osteoporosis, osteitis fibrosa cystica
Gastrointestinal: Peptic ulcer, pancreatitis
Underlying aetiology
Personal/family history of hypercalcaemia or multiple endocrine neoplasia
Drugs (lithium and thiazides)
Signs of dehydration
Altered mental status
Band keratopathy
Neck lump, cervical lymphadenopathy
Blood pressure – can be elevated
Underlying aetiology
Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis (MEN2)
Fibromas in the mandible/maxilla
(PHPT-jaw tumour syndrome)
Elevated or inappropriately
normal PTH
PTH mediated
24 hr urine calcium
24 hr urine creatinine
Paired with serum Ca and creatinine
Genetic testing (refer to the indications below)
Suppressed PTH
Non-PTH mediated
Medications: Thiazide
Thyroid function, Myeloma panel, PTHrP
CT Thorax Abdomen and Pelvis
PET-CT scan
Adjusted calcium, PTH, Vitamin D,
Renal proﬁle, Phosphate
Figure 50.1  Initial biochemical work-up of a hypercalcaemic patient.

<!-- page:372 -->
Parathyroid disorders
353
surgeon in pre-operative planning and achieve successful focused parathyroidectomy. The success rate is
greater than 95% in high-volume centres with experienced surgeons.
•	 Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with PHPT. Pre-operative replacement with vitamin D (1000–2000
units of cholecalciferol daily) is safe and unlikely to exacerbate hypercalcaemia. Vitamin D optimisation
reduces post-op hypocalcaemia.
Genetic testing in primary hyperparathyroidism
NHS England has developed eligibility criteria and available genetic panels for rare/inherited diseases. The
current genetic testing criteria for PHPT based on version 6 (published 8 January 2024) includes:
i.	age of diagnosis <50 years
OR
ii.	any age with:
•	 a confirmed or relevant family history, OR
•	 multiglandular disease or hyperplasia in the presence of relevant family history, OR
•	 parathyroid carcinoma or atypical or cystic adenoma, OR
•	 ossifying fibroma(s) of the maxilla and/or mandible.
Medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism
•	 Medical therapy can be considered in patients with PHPT who meet surgical criteria but are either unfit or
unwilling to undergo surgery (Table 50.4).
•	 The choice of pharmacological agents depends on the primary indication and its intended effect on bone
metabolism.
•	 Combination therapies could be considered if there is more than one clinical indication.
Table 50.3  Indications for referral for surgery in asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism.
1.	 Age <50 years
2.	 Serum calcium >0.25 mmol/L above upper limit of normal range
3.	 Reduction in eGFR or creatinine clearance <60 mL/min
4.	 Nephrolithiasis or renal stone – symptomatic or identified on imaging
5.	 Bone mineral density (BMD) T-score ≤−2.5 at any site or previous fragility fracture or both
Primary
Hyperparathyroidism
Primary
Hyperparathyroidism
Complications/indications.
for parathyroidectomy
Pre-operative localisation
(only for surgical candidates)
Bone densitometry
(DXA)
US
parathyroid
Technetium-99m
sestamibi
4D
CT neck
SPECT-CT
Renal proﬁle
Ultrasound Urinary Tract
Figure 50.2  Investigations in a patient with confirmed PHPT.

<!-- page:373 -->
354
Acute Medicine
Monitoring in asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism
1	 Serum calcium and renal profile – annually
2	 Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (ideally including distal 1/3 radius) and vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) – every two to three years
3	 Ultrasound scan (US) of urinary tract – if renal stone suspected
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is due to either absent or deficient production of PTH in response to hypocalcaemia. It can
present with acute hypocalcaemia to the acute medical take.
Severe hypocalcaemia is a life-threatening medical emergency and hence timely intervention is essential.
Causes of Hypoparathyroidism
•	 The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is post-surgical (75%), with nonsurgical causes accounting
for the remaining 25% of cases (Figure 50.3). Postoperative hypocalcaemia after anterior neck surgery is
usually transient and resolves within six weeks after surgery in approximately 2/3 of cases.
•	 If hypoparathyroidism persists six months after neck surgery, it can be considered chronic or permanent.
•	 Serum magnesium level should always be checked as hypomagnesemia (particularly below 0.4 mmol/L)
causes suppression as well as resistance to PTH action.
The clinical manifestations of hypoparathyroidism can vary from mild (perioral numbness, muscle cramps) to
severe symptoms (seizure, laryngospasm and arrhythmias) depending on the severity and the rapidity of hypocalcaemia. Patients with long-standing hypocalcaemia due to chronic hypoparathyroidism can be asymptomatic
despite significant biochemical derangements (Table 50.5).
Medical causes of hypoparathyroidism
1. Autoimmune
2. Genetics (e.g. DiGeorge syndrome)
3. Hypomagnesemia (e.g. chronic proton pump
    inhibitors use)
4. Radiation
5. Inﬁltration of parathyroids (iron, copper, tumour)
6. Drugs (Cinacalcet, Immune checkpoint inhibitors)
75%
Post-surgical
25%
Medical
Figure 50.3  Causes of hypoparathyroidism.
Table 50.4  Medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism.
Drug
Dose
Indication
Side effects
Cinacalcet
30 mg once – twice daily
(maximum 960 mg/day)
Ca > 2.85 mmol/L with
symptoms or Ca > 3 mmol/L
Headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness
Bisphosphonates
E.g. Alendronate 70 mg
weekly
Osteoporosis
Reflux and dyspepsia, rarely osteonecrosis
of jaw, atypical femoral fractures
Denosumab
Subcutaneous 60 mg
every six months
Osteoporosis
Cellulitis, eczema, hypocalcaemia

<!-- page:374 -->
Parathyroid disorders
355
Biochemical parameters suggesting hypoparathyroidism
•	 Hypocalcaemia: either adjusted total calcium or ionized calcium
•	 PTH: undetectable or inappropriately low/normal in the context of hypocalcaemia
•	 Hyperphosphatemia
Acute management
Mild hypocalcaemia (adjusted calcium >1.9 mmol/L) and asymptomatic
Oral calcium (e.g. AdCal, Calcichew, SandoCal etc) providing elemental calcium 2000–3000 mg in divided
doses can be used with/without vitamin D supplements.
Severe hypocalcaemia (adjusted calcium <1.9 mmol/L) or symptomatic
1	 Cardiac monitoring: risk of QTc prolongation and cardiac arrhythmias
2	 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate in 100 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose intravenously over
15 min with ECG monitoring.
3	 This can be repeated until patient is asymptomatic.
4	 Correct hypomagnesemia (if any) as per local trust guidelines
5	 If persistently hypocalcaemic, consider intravenous infusion of calcium gluconate via central or large peripheral
vein (prepare 100 mL of 10% calcium gluconate in 1 L of 0.9% sodium chloride and start at 50–100 mL/h
and titrate to aim for adjusted calcium around 2.1–2.3 mmol/L)
6	 Monitor serum calcium every 4–6 hours
7	 Switch to oral calcium therapy once serum calcium stabilised, consider starting activated Vitamin D
Chronic management
•	 Patients with hypoparathyroidism have a deficiency of both PTH as well as 1,25 hydroxyvitamin D due to a
lack of stimulation of 1α-hydroxylase enzyme in renal tubular cells in the absence of PTH (Table 50.6).
•	 Hence, 1-alpha hydroxylated vitamin D metabolites are necessary to correct the hypocalcaemia and facilitate
the intestinal absorption of calcium. Calcitriol is approximately two times more potent than alfacalcidol in
maintaining serum calcium within the target range.
•	 It is recommended to maintain serum calcium close to the lower limit of normal to reduce the risk of kidney
stones and nephrocalcinosis.
Table 50.5  Focused assessment in hypoparathyroidism patient.
History taking
Examination
Symptoms of hypocalcaemia
Perioral or distal extremities paraesthesia
Muscle cramps/weakness
Tetany (carpopedal spasm)
Laryngospasm/Bronchospasm
Confusion, Seizure
Underlying aetiology
History of neck surgery or radiation
Personal/family history of autoimmune disease
Head and neck cancer
Family history of hypoparathyroidism
Drugs (proton pump inhibitors [PPI], cinacalcet, immunotherapy)
Signs of neuromuscular excitability
Trousseau’s sign
Chvostek’s sign
Myoclonic jerks
Prolonged QTc on ECG
Underlying aetiology
Surgical neck scar
Vitiligo, oral mucosa or nail bed candidiasis
(Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome)
Dysmorphic features, deafness (genetic causes)
Signs of chronic liver disease (Haemochromatosis,
Wilson’s disease)

<!-- page:375 -->
356
Acute Medicine
Treatment goals in chronic hypoparathyroidism
•	 Aim for a low normal adjusted calcium (2.0–2.25 mmol/L) and free of symptoms of hypocalcaemia
•	 Avoid hypercalciuria (can consider low calcium diets, limit sodium intake and Thiazide if hypercalciuric)
•	 Maintain normal serum phosphate
•	 Maintain vitamin D level >50 nmol/L
•	 Maintain normal magnesium level
Monitoring in chronic hypoparathyroidism
•	 Assessment of symptoms of hypocalcaemia and hypercalcaemia
•	 Bone profile (calcium, magnesium phosphate) and renal profile – every 6–12 monthly, (sooner, i.e. within one
to two weeks after medication changes or acute admission related to hypocalcaemia or hypercalcaemia)
•	 24-hour urine calcium – annually
•	 Ultrasound urinary tract – if renal stone suspected
Patient support groups
These are a great resource for both patients and clinicians.
Parathyroid UK  – https://parathyroid uk.org gives information on both hypoparathyroidism and
hyperparathyroidism.
Further reading
Hyperparathyroidism
Bilezikian JP, Silverberg SJ, Bandeira F, et al. (2022) Management of primary hyperparathyroidism. J Bone
Miner Res 37(11), 2391–2403. DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4682. Epub 2022 Oct 17. PMID: 36054638.
Bollerslev J, Rejnmark L, Zahn A, et al. (2022) European expert consensus on practical management of
specific aspects of parathyroid disorders in adults and in pregnancy. Eur J Endocrinol 186(2), R33–R63.
DOI: 10.1530/EJE-21-1044. PMID: 34863037; PMCID: PMC8789028.
NHS England – National Genomic Test Directory https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/
Rare-and-inherited-disease-eligibility-criteria-version-6-January-2024.pdf.
Table 50.6  Medical management in hypoparathyroidism.
Medication
Dose
Calcium
Calcium carbonate (40% elemental Ca): should be
taken with food
Calcium citrate (21% elemental Ca): preferred in
achlorhydria, patients on PPI or post-bariatric surgery
1000–2000 mg of elemental calcium in
divided doses
Active vitamin D
Alfacalcidol
Calcitriol

0.5–4 mcg daily
0.25–2 mcg daily
Parental vitamin D
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3)
Ergocalciferol (vitamin D2)
800–2000 IU daily

<!-- page:376 -->
Parathyroid disorders
357
Hypoparathyroidism
Bollerslev J, Rejnmark L, Marcocci C, et al. (2015) European society of endocrinology clinical guideline:
treatment of chronic hypoparathyroidism in adults. Eur J Endocrinol 173(2), G1–G20. DOI: 10.1530/
EJE-15-0628. PMID: 26160136.
Khan AA, Bilezikian JP, Brandi ML, et al. (2022) Evaluation and management of hypoparathyroidism summary
statement and guidelines from the second international workshop. J Bone Miner Res 37(12), 2568–2585.
DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4691. Epub 2022 Nov 14. PMID: 36054621.
