# CHAPTER 52 Electrolyte disorders

- Pages: 387-403
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:387 -->
CHAPTER 52
368
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Human cells are immersed in a solution of water, electrolytes and organic molecules. Maintaining tight control
of the electrolyte concentration is vital for the optimal functioning of cells. Electrolyte abnormalities can lead
to multi-organ dysfunction and, if left untreated, can culminate in death.
Disorders of plasma sodium (reference range 135–145 mmol/L)
Disorders of plasma sodium concentration are amongst the most common electrolyte disturbances encountered
in clinical practice. Increased sodium concentrations lead to ‘hypernatraemia’, while decreased sodium concentrations leads to ‘hyponatraemia’. True changes in plasma sodium concentrations are always associated with
changes in plasma osmolality. For example, hypernatraemia with hypertonicity and hyponatraemia with hypotonicity. Plasma osmolality determines the movement of water between the intracellular and extracellular
compartments; hence, plasma sodium disorders are closely linked to changes in cell volume. The degree of cell
volume change parallels the rapidity of the change in plasma sodium concentration.
Hyponatraemia
Hyponatraemia is due to excess plasma water relative to the plasma sodium. It occurs due to loss of Na+ in
excess of water through the kidneys, intestine or sweat glands; retention of free water in the body through
increased water resorption by the kidneys; and excessive consumption of electrolyte-free water. Therefore,
hyponatraemia can occur with hypovolaemia, euvolaemia and hypervolaemia. Except for long-term consumption of electrolyte-free fluids (such as beer), all other causes of hyponatraemia are associated with increased
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) activity.
True hyponatraemia is always associated with a low plasma osmolality (measured serum osmolality
<275 mOsm/kg). If the plasma osmolality is normal or high, it indicates pseudo-hyponatraemia, where another
osmotically active particle has attracted water into the plasma, diluting Na+. Examples are hyperglycaemia,
hyper protein anaemia eg paraprotein, and hyperlipidaemia. The following discussion will apply only to true
hyponatraemia.
Clinical manifestations
Clinical manifestations of hyponatraemia depend on the rapidity of plasma [Na+] change. Acute hyponatraemia is associated with cerebral oedema, whereas patients can tolerate lower levels of [Na+] if this develops
gradually over many days or weeks. In acute hyponatraemia, the cells have not adapted to the low sodium
milieu and, therefore, can be reversed rapidly. Still, cell lysis occurs if the [Na+] is normalised rapidly in chronic
hyponatraemia. Hyponatraemia is considered acute if it develops within 48 h.
Electrolyte disorders
Martin Crook, Praveen Weeratunga, and Pramith Ruwanpathirana
CHAPTER 52

<!-- page:388 -->
Electrolyte disorders
369
Clinical features of hyponatraemia range from non-specific symptoms to coma and death. A serum
[Na+] < 135 mmol/L is defined as hyponatraemia, and the clinical features worsen with the reduction in [Na+]
(Table 52.1).
Causes of hyponatraemia
The causes of hyponatraemia can be divided according to the patient’s volume status, with management strategies varying according to the specific type (refer to Table 52.2).
SIADH warrants special consideration. It is a diagnosis of exclusion. Hypo cortisolism and hypothyroidism
should be excluded in euvolaemic hyponatraemia before diagnosing SIADH. Once SIADH is confirmed, the
underlying cause should be evaluated. The causes of SIADH are listed in Table 52.3.
Management of hyponatraemia
Differentiating true hyponatraemia from pseudohyponatraemia is the first step of management. This can be
established by measuring the serum osmolality.
The treatment of hyponatraemia requires balancing the risk of cerebral oedema (which can lead to death
and permanent brain damage) with severe hyponatraemia and osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) with
rapid correction of [Na+] (results in locked-in syndrome). The severity of hyponatraemia should be a composite
assessment of the serum [Na+] and the symptoms. If the symptoms and the Na+ concentration are not congruent, attributing the causality of symptoms to hyponatraemia should be done cautiously.
Managing severe hyponatraemia
The overarching principle is that the risk of cerebral oedema outweighs the risk of ODS in this group of
patients. Therefore, prompt correction of [Na+] is necessary. However, [Na+] correction should remove the
patient from the risk of cerebral oedema and not completely normalise [Na+]. This can be achieved by increasing the [Na+] by 4–5 mmol/L (Table 52.4).
Management of mild to moderate hyponatraemia
When treating the underlying cause of hyponatraemia (in mild to moderate hyponatraemia or after achieving
a 5 mmol/L increment in severe hyponatraemia), the serum [Na+] should not be increased by more than
10 mmol/L in the first 24 h and 8 mmol/L in subsequent days. Therapy should continue until the serum [Na+]
exceeds 130 mmol/L.
Table 52.1  Severity categories of hyponatraemia.
Hyponatraemia severity
Serum [Na+]*/mmol/L
Symptoms**
Mild hyponatraemia
135–130
Mild non-specific symptoms
Moderate hyponatraemia
130–125
Nausea without vomiting
Confusion
Headache
Profound hyponatraemia
<125
Vomiting
Cardio-respiratory distress
Deep somnolence
Seizures
Coma
* Measured by ion-specific electrode.
** The symptoms do not always parallel the [Na+]. The rapidity of the lowering of plasma [Na+] contributes to the
symptom severity. Some patients with chronic severe hyponatraemia developed over a long period can have only mild
symptoms. Although the symptoms are non-specific, chronic hyponatraemia is associated with osteoporosis, falls,
cognitive decline and death.

<!-- page:389 -->
Table 52.3  Diagnostic criteria and causes of SIADH.
Criteria for diagnosis of SIADH
•	 Hyponatraemia and reduced plasma osmolality
•	 Urine sodium concentration >30 mmol /L and urine osmolality greater than plasma osmolality or not maximally
dilute
•	 No oedema or signs of hypovolaemia
•	 Normal renal, thyroid and adrenal function
•	 The patient is not taking diuretics or purgatives
Causes of SIADH
Malignant disease
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus, thymoma, lymphoma, sarcoma, mesothelioma, carcinoma of the pancreas and
duodenum
Pulmonary disorders
Pneumonia, tuberculosis, empyema, asthma, pneumothorax, positive-pressure ventilation
Neurological disorders
Meningitis, encephalitis, head injury, brain tumour, cerebral abscess, subarachnoid haemorrhage, Guillain–Barré
syndrome
Drugs
Antidepressants, carbamazepine, cytotoxics, MDMA (‘ecstasy’), NSAIDs, opioids, oxytocin, phenothiazines, thiazides
Vincristine
Others
Post-operative state
HIV infection
Idiopathic
Reset osmostat
Acute intermittent porphyria
Table 52.2  Hyponatraemia according to the extracellular fluid status.
Hyponatraemia
type
Causes
Laboratory parameters**
Management
Spot urine
osmolality/mOsm/kg
Spot urine
[Na+]/mmol/L
Hypovolaemic
hyponatraemia
Renal losses: diuretic
use, salt wasting
syndromes
>100*
>30
Reducing the dose, stopping
diuretics, fluid resuscitation
with isotonic crystalloids
Non-renal losses:
vomiting, diarrhoea,
excessive sweating
>100*
<30
Fluid resuscitation with
isotonic crystalloids
Euvolaemic
hyponatraemia
Excessive water intake
(beer potomania,
primary polydipsia)
<100
<30
Treat the underlying
condition.
Water restriction for the
management of SIADH
SIADH
Hypocortisolism
Hypothyroidism
Acute intermittent
porphyria
>100*
>30
Hypervolaemic
hyponatraemia
Heart failure
d-ACLD
Nephrotic syndrome
>100*
<30
Manage and optimise the
underlying condition
Water restriction considered
Chronic kidney disease
Varies over a wide range
d-ACLD, decompensated advanced chronic liver disease; SIADH, Syndrome of inappropriate cortisol secretion.
* Urine osmolality should be more than the plasma osmolality, indicating ADH secretion.
** Other laboratory investigations that can be used are serum urea concentration, serum uric acid concentration,
fractional sodium excretion, fractional uric acid excretion, fractional urea excretion and plasma copeptin concentration.

<!-- page:390 -->
Electrolyte disorders
371
It should be noted that the risk of ODS is higher in patients with a history of alcohol abuse, liver disease, use
of thiazides or antidepressants, and concomitant hypokalaemia. If these risk factors are present, a lower increment of [Na+] should be targeted.
If the serum [Na+] increases beyond the target, it can be reversed by infusing 5% dextrose or administering
intravenous or nasal desmopressin.
Hypernatraemia
Hypernatraemia is a serum [Na+] > 145 mmol/L. The serum osmolality should be raised (>300 mOsm/kg) in all
cases of true hypernatraemia. It occurs either with excessive loading of Na+ or loss of body water more than
the loss of body Na+.
Excessive Na+ loading is usually iatrogenic and caused by overtreatment with Na+-containing solutions such
as 3% NaCl, 8.4% NaHCO3, or IV Albumin solution etc.
Causes of hypernatraemia
Loss of body water more than Na+ can occur through renal or extra-renal routes. Diabetes insipidus (cranial,
nephrogenic or gestational) is a common cause. Osmotically active particles (glucose and mannitol) will drag
water into the tubules and lead to water loss exceeding Na+ loss. In contrast to secretory diarrhoea, where Na+
is lost through the gut (leading to hyponatraemia), osmotic diarrhoea drags body water into the gut lumen,
resulting in hypernatraemia.
The natural response to hypernatraemia is the thirst response and increased ADH secretion, to reabsorb free
water from the renal collecting ducts. Therefore, elderly or critically ill patients with impaired thirst response
are prone to develop hypernatraemia. Except in cases of cranial diabetes insipidus, plasma ADH should be
elevated in all causes of hypernatraemia.
Clinical features
Similar to hyponatraemia, the clinical features of hypernatremia are primarily neurological (confusion, altered
mental status and coma). Hypernatraemia leads to a shift of water from the brain cells to the extracellular
Table 52.4  Steps of managing severe hyponatraemia.
Step
Action
Step 1
IV 3% saline 150 mL** over 20 min
Step 2
Check serum [Na+].
Step 3
If serum [Na+] has increased by 5 mmol/L or the symptoms have improved, stop further saline infusions.
Initiate workup for the cause of hyponatraemia.*
Step 4
If the serum [Na+] has not increased by 5 mmol/L, repeat steps 1 and 2.
Three consecutive 150 mL† of 3% saline infusions can be given over 24 h.
† There is no consensus on whether to give 3% saline as a continuous infusion over 4–6 h or a slow IV
injection over 20 min.
Step 5
If the symptoms persist despite an increase of 5 mmol/L in [Na+], a 3% saline infusion should be started,
targeting a rise of 1 mmol/L/h in the serum [Na+].
The infusion should be stopped when the [Na+] concentration increases by 10  mmol/L or the serum sodium
concentration reaches 130  mmol/L, whichever occurs first.
Titration of the 3% saline infusion can be calculated using the following formula, although it is prone to
error. Four hourly serum [Na+] evaluations should be done to prevent over-correction.

Change in seru
Na
Infusate Na
Infusate K
serum Na
Total bod
m
y water l
1
Figure 1. Adrogue Madias formula
Adapted from Adrogue and Madias[6]  ((308 mmol – 115 mmol) / ((60 kg × 0.6) + 1) = 5.2 mmol/L)
* The symptoms might take time to recover. Hence, do not aim at complete reversal of symptoms immediately.
** Reduce the dose if the patient is thin-built and <50 kg.

<!-- page:391 -->
372
Acute Medicine
compartment, leading to brain shrinkage. In children, this can result in intracranial haemorrhages, while in
adults, this leads to osmotic demyelination. Similar to hyponatraemia, rapid correction of Na+ in chronic hypernatraemia is harmful and results in brain oedema. (the opposite consequences of hyponatraemia).
Rhabdomyolysis has been described with severe hypernatraemia.
Management
The target drop of serum [Na+] is 10 mmol/L per day in chronic hypernatraemia. Acute hypernatraemia (<48 h
from onset) can be usually rapidly corrected without the risk of developing brain oedema.
The principle of correcting hypernatraemia is to provide the body with salt-free water, either enterally or
parenterally. The free water deficit and the amount of fluid required for correction can be calculated using the
following formula:
Free Water Deficit
serum Na
Body Weight kilogr
140
140
0 6
/
.
ams
TBW Total body water or body weight in kilograms
Calcul
:
.
[
0 6
ating the Effect of liter of an Intravenous Solutionon Serum Sodiu
1
m
Change in serum Na
Na infused
Na serum
total body water
1 ]
Management strategies for specific causes of hypernatraemia are summarised in Table 52.5.
Table 52.5  Causes for and management of hypernatraemia.
Cause
Diagnostic features
Management
Hypovolaemic causes
Cranial diabetes
insipidus*
Inappropriately dilute urine**
Polyuria (>3L/day)
Urine osmolality increases
>50% with DDAVP
Treat the underlying cause. Regular DDAVP
supplementation
Nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus*
Inappropriately dilute urine**
Polyuria (>3L/day)
Urine osmolality does not
increase >50% with DDVP
Remove secondary cause (Li+, hypercalcaemia,
hypokalaemia and obstructive uropathy)
Cautious use of thiazides and NSAIDS
Excessive water intake
Diuresis due to
osmotically active
particles (glucose and
mannitol)
Concentrated urine
(>800 mOsm/kg)
Increased urine volume
Low urine [Na+]
Treat the underlying cause
Hypotonic crystalloids (5% dextrose, ½ normal saline)
infusions and increased oral/enteral free water
(In hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state, the serum
osmolality is higher than 0.9% saline. Therefore,
0.9% saline is the preferred crystalloid)
Osmotic diarrhoea
Concentrated urine.
(>800 mOsm/kg)
Oliguric (<500 mL/day)
Treat the underlying cause
Hypotonic crystalloids (5% dextrose and ½ normal saline)
infusions
Reduced thirst
Concentrated urine.
(>800 mOsm/kg)
Oliguric (<500 mL/day)
Increase oral free water intake
Hypervolaemic causes
Excessive Na+ loading
Concentrated urine
Increased urine volume
Increased urinary [Na+]
Increase enteral-free water intake
If severe, consider hypotonic crystalloids (5% dextrose
and ½ normal saline).
DDAVP, Desmopressin.
* In the presence of hypernatraemia, a water-deprivation test is contraindicated.
** Urine osmolality is lower than the serum osmolality.

<!-- page:392 -->
Electrolyte disorders
373
Disorders of plasma potassium (reference
range 3.5–5.5 mmol/L)
Disorders of potassium can occur due to three reasons:
1	 Excess or reduced intake into the body.
2	 Excess or reduced excretion from the body.
3	 Movement between intracellular and extracellular compartments.
While sodium disorders primarily lead to neurological manifestations, potassium disorders often result in cardiac
manifestation; and sudden death is possible. Therefore, managing potassium disorders is a vital skill for clinicians.
Hyperkalaemia
A serum potassium (K+) level greater than 5.5 mmol/L is defined as hyperkalaemia.
The most common cause of hyperkalaemia is reduced potassium excretion from the body, making it a significant complication of kidney disease. Drug-induced hyperkalaemia due to mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers is also commonly seen in clinical practice.
The causes of hyperkalaemia are detailed in Table 52.6.
Clinical manifestations
Cardiac arrhythmia are an important clinical consequence of hyperkalaemia. The severity of hyperkalaemia and
associated electrocardiograph (ECG) changes are shown in Figure 52.1.
Management
The management of hyperkalaemia depends in-part upon the severity and the presence of ECG changes.
If there is an imminent risk of cardiac arrhythmia (in cases of severe hyperkalaemia or the presence of ECG
changes), it is crucial to stabilise the cardiac myocyte membrane promptly. Cardiac membrane stabilisation is
Table 52.6  Causes of hyperkalaemia.
Pseudohyperkalaemia*
Reduced excretion from the body
Acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease
Mineralocorticoid deficiency:
•	 Adrenal insufficiency, hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism, renal tubular acidosis type 4
Drugs:
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone
and amiloride), cyclosporine, tacrolimus, oral contraceptive pill, NAIDS and trimethoprim
The transition from the intracellular compartment to the extracellular compartment
Severe tissue damage:
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
•	 Tumour-lysis syndrome
Acidosis (non-anion gap) or hypoxia
Digoxin toxicity
Familial hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis (rare)
Excessive intake
Oral or intravenous potassium excess (drugs, supplements and food)
Red cell transfusions
* When intracellular K+ leaks out of cells within the blood tubes, leading to a spuriously high K+ level. (In haemolysis,
leukaemia, cooling of blood, red cell membrane-transporter defects, muscle activity during venepuncture etc).

<!-- page:393 -->
374
Acute Medicine
achieved by administering IV calcium gluconate (30 mL) or IV calcium chloride (10 mL) over 2–3 min through a
large cannula. This intervention does not reduce the plasma K+ levels but prevents the development of cardiac
arrhythmias. The patient should be transferred to a monitored bed equipped with continuous cardiac monitoring and defibrillation facilities. The ECG should be repeated after 5 min, and if the ECG changes have not been
reversed, another dose of IV calcium should be administered.
Subsequently, measures should be taken to reduce the plasma K+ levels.
1	 Drive plasma K+ into the cells (used to buy time as it has a quick action)
a	 IV insulin and glucose infusion: add 10 units of human insulin to 50 mL of 50% glucose and infuse over
30  min. Avoid hypoglycaemia by monitoring blood glucose. The effect begins at 10  min, peaks at
30–60 min, and lasts 4–6 h.
b	 Nebulised salbutamol: 10–20 mg (contraindicated in unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction). This
effect starts at about 30 min, peaks at around 90 min, and lasts 2–6 h.
c	 Intravenous sodium bicarbonate (isotonic or hypotonic) can be used in severe hyperkalaemia with severe
acidosis. However, the effect is delayed and thus not very useful in the acute setting.
2	 Remove K+ from the body.
a	 Gut potassium-binding resins: Options include calcium resonium (15 g three times daily orally or 30 g daily
by retention enema), Patiromer (8.4 g daily orally) and sodium zirconium cyclosilicate (10 g three times
daily for 72 h)
b	 Haemodialysis
3	 Reduce K+ intake
a	 Reduce K+ rich meals (includes fresh fruits, green leaves and salt substitutes)
b	 Omit K+ supplementation
4	 Treat the precipitating cause
a	 Discontinue drugs that cause hyperkalaemia
b	 Treat the underlying disease (kidney disease, rhabdomyolysis and tumour lysis syndrome)
Hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia is a serum potassium level of less than 3.5 mmol/L. Hypokalaemia can result from either
increased K+ loss from the body or the movement of K+ into the cells from the extracellular compartment.
Hypokalaemia due to reduced intake is exceedingly rare (see Table 52.7). The body loses K+ either through
the kidneys or the gut.
Normal
(K+ < 5.5 mEq/L)
Possible ECG
alterations:
Peaked T wave
Prolonged PR segment
Shortened QT interval
Decreased amplitude of P
wave Widening of QRS
complex
Loss of P wave
Increasing severity of hyperkalemia
Sinusoidal
wave
Severe
(K+ >8.0mEq/L)
Mild
(K+ 5.5 – 6.5 mEq/L)
Moderate
(K+ 6.5–8.0 mEq/L)
Figure 52.1  ECG changes of hyperkalaemia. The ECG changes, and the serum K+ does not always parallel. In
patients with chronic hyperkalaemia, the ECG changes might be absent.

<!-- page:394 -->
Electrolyte disorders
375
Clinical manifestations
Hypokalaemia predisposes individuals to ECG QT prolongation, ventricular arrhythmias and death. Severe
hypokalaemia, or hypokalaemia with ECG changes (see Figure 52.2), should be treated promptly with
intravenous K+. In addition to its effects on the cardiac muscle, hypokalaemia affects the skeletal muscle,
leading to proximal myopathy, areflexia and rhabdomyolysis. When the smooth muscles are affected, it
results in paralytic ileus. Mild-to-moderate hypokalaemia can be treated with oral potassium chloride (KCl)
supplementation.
Table 52.7  Causes of hypokalaemia.
Pseudo hypokalaemia – increased uptake of K+ into the cells in-vitro (in acute leukaemia)
Increased loss of body K+
Losses through kidney
Mineralocorticoid excess/apparent mineralocorticoid excess
•	 Conn’s syndrome
•	 Cushing’s syndrome
•	 Bartter/Gitelman’s syndrome
•	 Liquorice excess
•	 Glucocorticoid therapy
Fanconi syndrome
Hypomagnesaemia
Drugs: loop diuretics, thiazides, carbonate dehydratase inhibitors, penicillin group antibiotics
Renal tubular acidosis type 1 and 2
Losses through the gut
Gastrointestinal loss:
Prolonged diarrhoea or vomiting
Intestinal fistula
Purgative abuse
Redistribution from the extracellular compartment to the intra-cellular compartment
Alkalosis
Catecholamines
Vitamin B12 therapy
Insulin
Beta-adrenergic drugs
Thyrotoxicosis
Rapidly growing tumours
Familial hypokalaemic periodic paralysis (rare)
Slightly
prolonged
PR interval
Slightly
peaked P
wave
Shallow
T wave
Prominent
U wave
ST depression
Figure 52.2  ECG changes of hypokalaemia.

<!-- page:395 -->
376
Acute Medicine
Evaluation
A complete discussion on evaluating the causes of hypokalaemia is beyond the scope of this book. However, a brief
outline is provided in Table 52.8. The definitive treatment of hyperkalaemia is addressing the underlying cause.
Management
K+ infusions can be painful and cause thrombophlebitis. If administered too rapidly, they can induce brady
arrhythmias and cardiac arrest. Therefore, KCl should be given as a slow infusion at 20 mmol/h. KCl is constituted of 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl) with a maximum concentration of 20 mmol/L. It should be infused
through a central line. The body K+ deficit can be calculated using the following formula:
K deficit in mmol L
desired K
mmol L
patient s K
mmol
/
/
/
’
L
body weight kg
0 4
.
It should be remembered that total body K+ is usually normal in conditions where hypokalaemia is due to the
shift of K+ from the extracellular compartment to the intracellular compartment. Therefore, such patients risk
developing rebound hyperkalaemia; hence, K+ should be replaced only to prevent imminent cardiac arrhythmias.
Disorders of plasma calcium (reference
range 2.20–2.60 mmol/L albumin corrected or adjusted)
Disorders of Ca2+ are mainly due to abnormalities of PTH secretion, vitamin D and bone metabolism. Calcium is
bound to albumin (and other anions) in circulation. Therefore, the total serum Ca2+ level is a function of serum
albumin. It’s the free fraction of calcium that’s physiologically important. Hence, for the management and evaluation of disorders of Ca2+, the serum albumin corrected calcium or the serum ionised Ca2+ should be measured.
Table 52.8  Aetiological evaluation of hypokalaemia.
Exclude obvious causes: diarrhoea, vomiting, diuretics, insulin and beta-agonists.
Look for urinary K+ loss: the ideal test is a 24-h urinary collection to quantify K+ (>15 mmol/L despite hypokalaemia
suggesting renal loss). An alternative is the urinary K+/creatinine ratio (>13 mmol/L/g → suggestive of renal loss). The
patient should not be on diuretics.
If there is urinary K+ loss, proceed to step 3.
Localise the pathology into the nephron segment: Disorders of all nephron segments can lead to hypokalaemia.
Segment of the nephron
Function
Condition
Blood
pressure
Acid–base
imbalance
Additional features
Proximal tubule
↓
Proximal RTA
↔
Acidosis
Glycosuria,
aminoaciduria
Ascending limb of LOH
↓
Bartter’s syndrome
↓
Alkalosis
Hypocalcaemia
Distal convoluted tubule
↓
Gitelman syndrome
↓
Alkalosis
Hypercalcaemia
Collecting ducts: principal
cells
↑
Hyperaldosteronism
Syndrome of apparent
mineralocorticoid excess
Liddle syndrome
Liquorice ingestion
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
types (17 alpha and 11 ß
hydroxylase deficiency)
↑
Alkalosis
Collecting duct:
intercalated cells
↓
Distal RTA
↔
Acidosis
Nephrocalcinosis,
renal stones and
alkaline urine
LOH, loop of Henle; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.

<!-- page:396 -->
Electrolyte disorders
377
The serum calcium correction formula (albumin corrected total calcium (mmol/L) = Total calcium (mmol/L) +
0.02 [40 (g/L) – albumin (g/L)])
Hypercalcaemia
The definitions of hypercalcaemia severity categories are illustrated in Figure 52.3.
Causes
Hypercalcaemia is a result of one of four mechanisms:
1	 Increased PTH: Due to primary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia or
PTH-related peptide secreted from malignancies.
2	 Increased vitamin D: Caused vitamin D overdose or increased synthesis in granulomatous diseases (such as
sarcoidosis or lymphoma)
3	 Increased bone lysis: Seen in disseminated malignancy, multiple myeloma or thyrotoxicosis
4	 Miscellaneous causes: Drug-induced (e.g. thiazides), milk-alkali syndrome, Addison’s disease, VIPoma or
pheochromocytoma
Clinical features
The clinical features of hypercalcaemia can be remembered by the phrase ‘bones, groans, moans and stones.’
•	 Bones: Increased bone lysis can cause hypercalcaemia, predisposing to increased fracture risk (hyperparathyroidism, myeloma and bone metastasis)
•	 Abdominal groans: Due to gut dysmotility and renal colic
•	 Psychotic moans: Personality changes or depression due to the effect on the brain and
•	 Renal stones: Due to increased urinary filtration of Ca2+ (sometimes resulting in nephrocalcinosis and renal
failure).
The ECG changes of hypercalcaemia include bradycardia, atrioventricular (AV) nodal block and short QT
interval.
Hypercalcemic
crisis
Moderate
hypercalcemia
Mild
hypercalcemia
Normocalcemia
Total serum calcium level, mg/dL (mmol/L)
8 (2)
10 (2.5)
12 (3)
14 (3.5)
16 (4)
4 (1)
5.6 (1.4)
8 (2)
Ionized serum calcium level, mg/dL (mmol/L)
10 (2.5)
12 (3)
Figure 52.3  Definitions of hypercalcaemia severity categories.

<!-- page:397 -->
378
Acute Medicine
Hypercalcaemia can also cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and lead to polyuria and dehydration. Patients
with severe hypercalcaemia are often profoundly dehydrated. Additionally, acute pancreatitis is a serious complication of severe hypercalcaemia.
Management of severe hypercalcaemia
Severe hypercalcaemia is a serum corrected/adjusted calcium greater than 3.40 mmol /L.
Aggressive hydration (4–6 L of 0.9% NaCl over 24 h) is the first and the most important step in managing
severe hypercalcaemia.
After volume repletion, if the serum Ca2+ is still high,
•	 IV bisphosphonates (IV zoledronic acid 4 mg or IV pamidronate 60 mg),
•	 subcutaneous denosumab,
•	 IV steroids (hydrocortisone 100–300 mg daily),
•	 calcitonin
•	 haemodialysis can be used sequentially.
The definitive management is the aetiological evaluation and treatment of the underlying cause. Managing
mild asymptomatic hypercalcaemia involves identifying and treating the underlying cause of hypercalcaemia.
Hypocalcaemia
Hypocalcaemia can be defined as an albumin adjusted or corrected serum calcium of less than 2.20 mmol/L.
Clinical features
Hypocalcaemia increases the excitability of neurons and muscles. It predisposes to seizures, prolongs the ECG
QT interval of the heart (resulting in ventricular tachyarrhythmias), and causes smooth muscle contraction,
which can lead to bronchospasms, laryngospasms, and death. Early symptoms include peri-oral numbness and
paraesthesia of the hands and feet. Clinical signs that demonstrate neuronal hyper-excitability include the
Chvostek’s sign and the Trousseau’s sign (Figure 52.4).
(a)
(b)
Figure 52.4  Clinical signs of hypocalcaemia. (a) Positive Chvostek’s sign and (b) positive Trousseau’s sign.

<!-- page:398 -->
Electrolyte disorders
379
Chvostek’s sign-tapping of facial nerve branches results in twitching of facial muscles. Trousseau’s
sign – Elicited by inflating the BP cuff on the upper arm to 20 mmHg above systolic pressure within 2–5 min.
The carpal spasm occurs due to ulnar nerve ischaemia.
Causes
1	 Reduced PTH levels – Hypoparathyroidism (post-thyroidectomy, autoimmune or due to Mg2+ deficiency) or
pseudohypoparathyroidism (PTH).
2	 Vitamin D deficiency includes rickets, osteomalacia or vitamin D resistance.
3	 Mineral bone disease of chronic kidney disease
4	 Miscellaneous causes – drug-induced (e.g., loop diuretics), burns, rhabdomyolysis, tumour lysis syndrome or
acute pancreatitis.
Management
Hypocalcaemia should be treated promptly to prevent life-threatening complications. Severe hypocalcaemia is
treated with 10% IV calcium gluconate (10 mL administered over 2–3 min). Mild to moderate hypocalcaemia
is treated with oral calcium (such as calcium lactate, calcium carbonate and calcium acetate) and vitamin D
supplementation.
Disorders of plasma magnesium (reference range
0.70-1.20 mmol /L)
Magnesium is essential for neuro-muscular activity, intracellular enzymatic reactions, energy metabolism, cell
replication and nucleic acid metabolism. Similar to Ca2+ metabolism, Mg2+ is stored in the bone in large quantities. While Ca2+ is primarily an extracellular cation, Mg2+ is mainly intracellular.
Hypomagnesaemia
Causes
1	 Reduced gastrointestinal absorption: due to malabsorption syndromes, proton pump inhibitors, and
vitamin D deficiency.
2	 Increased gastrointestinal loss: often due to diarrhoea
3	 Increased renal loss: due to renal tubular dysfunction or drug-induced effects – such as the use of diuretics
4	 Intracellular shift: seen in conditions like refeeding syndrome or diabetes ketoacidosis (similar to K+, another
intracellular cation)
Clinical manifestations
The neuromuscular features of hypomagnesaemia are tetany, tremor, seizures, muscle weakness, ataxia, nystagmus, vertigo, apathy, depression, irritability, delirium and psychosis. Cardiac features are sinus tachycardia,
other tachyarrhythmias, QT prolongation, and ST and T wave changes.
Management
Treatment of hypomagnesaemia is to replace Mg2+
, identify the aetiology and address it.
Magnesium is replaced intravenously in severe hypomagnesaemia. IV MgCl2 (50 mmol/day as a continuous
infusion) or IV MgSO4 can be used. The Mg2+ dose should be corrected for renal functions. Mild hypomagnesaemia is treated with oral Mg salts (MgCl2, Mg(OH)2, MgSO4).

<!-- page:399 -->
380
Acute Medicine
Certain causes of hypomagnesaemia are associated with simultaneous hypokalaemia or hypocalcaemia. As
discussed earlier, Mg2+ replacement will aid in correcting K+ and Ca2+. However, in hypophosphatemia, Mg2+
replacement can further reduce the plasma PO4
3−. This can be prevented by replacing Ca2+ simultaneously.
Hypermagnesaemia
Causes
The causes of hypermagnesaemia are sometimes the opposite of those for hypomagnesaemia.
•	 Increased gastrointestinal absorption: due to cathartics or antacids
•	 Reduced urinary excretion: in conditions such as familial hypocalciuric hypocalcaemia or renal failure
•	 Increased transition from the intracellular space to extracellular space: seen in tumour lysis syndrome, burns,
or trauma
•	 Other causes: including adrenal insufficiency or hypothyroidism
Of the aforementioned causes, the commonest is iatrogenic – due to cathartics/antacids and treatment of
asthma, eclampsia etc.
Clinical manifestations
Hypermagnesaemia is rare due to the kidney’s ability to excrete large amounts of magnesium ions. However,
when it occurs, it reduces the excitability of the neurons and muscles, relaxes the vascular smooth muscles
and leads to refractory shock. The heart is also affected by severe hypermagnesaemia. It manifests as
bradycardia (despite hypotension), prolongation of ECG PR, QRS, and QT intervals, and heart block. Gut
mobility decreases. Muscle weakness and paralysis in hypomagnesaemia might escalate to respiratory failure in severe cases.
Management
Management of hypermagnesaemia is to treat the underlying cause. Hydration with normal saline is commonly practised to dilute the serum Mg2+. In severe hypermagnesaemia, dialysis can be initiated for rapid
correction.
Disorders of plasma phosphate (reference range 0.80–1.50 mmol/L)
Phosphate is an intracellular anion. It is absorbed from the gut along with Ca2+, which is regulated by activated
vitamin D. The bone is a large store of inorganic phosphate; many proteins and nucleic acids have phosphate
incorporated into their organic structures. Phosphate is excreted via the kidneys, which PTH enhances, whereas
phosphate reabsorption is promoted by activated vitamin D.
Causes
The causes of hyper and hypophosphatemia are summarised in Table 52.9.
Management
The management of phosphate disorders equates to the management of the underlying aetiology. For
hypophosphataemia, oral or intravenous phosphate supplements are used to replace phosphate. Intravenous
phosphate (9–18 mmol) should be constituted in 5% dextrose and be given over 6–12 h. The patient should
be monitored for hypocalcaemia.
For hyperphosphataemia, gut phosphate binders (such as CaCO3, sevelamer or lanthanum carbonate) are
used to increase the elimination of phosphate from the body. Gut phosphate binders are the mainstay of treatment for hyperphosphataemia associated with renal bone disease.

<!-- page:400 -->
Electrolyte disorders
381
Acknowledgements
Sharmila Kugaperumal and Thamalee Palliyaguru for proofreading.
Further reading
Sterns RH. (2015) Disorders of plasma sodium – causes, consequences, and correction. N Engl J Med
372, 55–65.
Spasovski G, Vanholder R, Allolio B, et al. (2014) Clinical practice guideline on diagnosis and treatment of
hyponatraemia The guidelines were peer-reviewed by the owner societies and by external referees before
publication. Eur J Endocrinol 170(3), G1–G47. DOI: 10.1530/EJE-13-1020.
The Renal Association, Guideline for Management of Hyperkalaemia. 2020. https://www.ukkidney.org/
health-professionals/guidelines/treatment-acute-hyperkalaemia-adults.
Table 52.9  Causes for disorders of phosphate.
Disorder of plasma
phosphate
Cause
Consequence
Hypophosphataemia
Reduced absorption
•	 Osteomalacia.
•	 Myopathy
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
•	 Impaired diaphragmatic contractility
•	 Cardiomyopathy
•	 Seizures
•	 Paraesthesia
•	 Renal tubular impairment
Vitamin D deficiency (Rickets and
osteomalacia)
Malabsorption syndromes
Anorexia nervosa
Increased urinary loss
Hyperparathyroidism
Proximal tubular dysfunction
(Fanconi’s syndrome)
X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets
Oncogenic hypophosphataemia
Intracellular shifts
Insulin therapy in diabetes
Refeeding syndrome
Hyperphosphataemia
Increased absorption
Phosphates bind with ionised Ca2+ and
precipitate in the tissues. This leads to
tissue calcification (calciphylaxis) and
hypocalcaemia.
Persistently elevated phosphate levels are a
risk factor for atherosclerosis.
Vitamin D toxicity
Phosphate containing laxatives
Reduced urinary loss
Hypoparathyroidism/
pseudohypoparathyroidism
Renal failure
Extracellular shift
Tumour lysis syndrome
Rhabdomyolysis
Trauma

<!-- page:402 -->
Neurology
SECTION 6
