# CHAPTER 53 Headache syndromes: including subarachnoid haemorrhage and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis

- Pages: 404-409
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:404 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
385
The most common cause of acute headache in patients presenting to the emergency department is migraine.
A minority have potentially life-threatening disorders such as subarachnoid haemorrhage, bacterial meningitis
or cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. The clinical assessment (Table 53.1) enables you to place the patient in
one of three groups, guiding differential diagnosis, investigation and further management.
1	 Acute headache with ‘red flag’ features
•	 Red flag features include fever, reduced level of consciousness, optic disc swelling, neck stiffness, and
focal neurological signs. Causes of headache with red flag features are given in Table 53.2.
•	 If the patient is febrile, or central nervous system (CNS) infection is highly suspected, take blood cultures and
start antimicrobial therapy to cover bacterial meningitis and herpes simplex encephalitis. Next, obtain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to confirm the diagnosis, identify the pathogen, and direct further therapy. Computed
tomography (CT) must be performed before lumbar puncture (LP) if any of the following are present:
•	 Focal neurological signs
•	 Altered consciousness
•	 Optic disc swelling, which may be due to raised intracranial pressure (papilloedema)
•	 Immunosuppression
•	 Recent seizure(s), within two weeks
•	 Tuberculous and cryptococcal meningitis should be considered in high-risk groups. Meningism may be
absent or mild in these diseases.
•	 Infectious diseases acquired abroad (e.g. malaria and typhoid) should be considered in patients with the
relevant travel history.
•	 When subarachnoid haemorrhage is suspected (see below), CT is the initial investigation of choice and
lumbar puncture is likely to be more useful if delayed until 12 h after the onset of headache.
2	 Headache with local signs
•	 Causes and management are summarized in Table 53.3.
3	 Acute headache without abnormal signs
•	 Causes are given in Table 53.4.
•	 Always consider subarachnoid haemorrhage and giant-cell arteritis (see below).
•	 Formal criteria state that a headache cannot be diagnosed as migraine or tension-type headache until
multiple episodes have occurred. While such criteria highlight the increased difficulty in diagnosing a
single episode, it may still be appropriate to treat migraine-like headache as such if other more serious
causes have been satisfactorily excluded.
Headache syndromes: including
subarachnoid haemorrhage
and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
Simon Rinaldi and Roberto Bellanti
CHAPTER 53

<!-- page:405 -->
Table 53.2  Causes of acute headache with ‘red flag’ features.
Cause
Vascular
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
•	 Intracranial haemorrhage
•	 Subdural haematoma
•	 Hypertensive encephalopathy
•	 Pituitary apoplexy
•	 Cerebral vasculitis
Infective
•	 Bacterial meningitis
•	 Viral encephalitis
•	 Brain abscess
•	 Subdural empyema
•	 Tuberculous meningitis
•	 Cryptococcal meningitis
•	 Toxoplasma encephalitis
•	 Systemic infection with headache/meningism
Others
•	 Poisoning with amphetamine/cocaine
•	 Other causes of raised intracranial pressure
•	 Hyperviscosity syndrome
•	 Severe hyponatraemia
•	 Malignant meningitis (carcinoma, melanoma, lymphoma and leukaemia)
Table 53.1  Focused assessment of the patient with acute headache.
History
Speed of onset: Was it sudden? How long did it take to reach maximum intensity?
Context of onset: Was it exertion-related, orgasmic, upon changing posture or waking up?
Duration: Is the headache still present? How long has it lasted?
Severity: How severe? Worst headache ever? Syncope at onset?
Distribution: Unilateral or bilateral? Frontotemporal or occipital?
Associated features: Was there associated nausea, vomiting, photo/phonophobia or pulsating quality? All are
associated but not pathognomonic of migraine.
Associated systemic, neurological or visual symptoms (e.g. syncope/presyncope, limb weakness, speech disturbance,
blurring of vision, transient blindness, diplopia, scalp tenderness, jaw claudication, malaise, myalgia/stiffness,
scotomata and fortification spectra). Did these precede or follow the headache?
Background
Medication history and possible exposure to toxins
Recent travel abroad
Immunosuppressed or known malignancy
Disorders associated with increased risk of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage: polycystic kidney disease,
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome type IV, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, fibromuscular dysplasia, sickle cell disease, alfa-1
antitrypsin deficiency
Family history of migraine or subarachnoid haemorrhage
Examination
Key observations: airway, respiratory rate, arterial oxygen saturation, heart rate, blood pressure, perfusion,
consciousness level, temperature, blood glucose
Neck stiffness (in both flexion and extension)
Focal neurological signs
Horner syndrome – if complete or partial ptosis and constricted pupil are present, consider carotid artery dissection.
Visual acuity and fields defects
Fundi (disc swelling or retinal haemorrhage)
Signs of dental, ENT or ophthalmic disease
Temporal artery tenderness or loss of pulsation

<!-- page:406 -->
Headache syndromes: including subarachnoid haemorrhage and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
387
Table 53.3  Causes of acute headache with local signs.
Cause
Comment/management
Acute sinusitis
Suspect if associated fever, facial pain especially on bending over, mucopurulent nasal
discharge, and tenderness on pressure over the affected sinus.
Obtain X-rays of the sinuses, looking for mucosal thickening, a fluid level or opacification.
Treatment is with phenoxymethylpenicillin and steam inhalations if there are no lifethreatening complications, or co-amoxiclav if the patient is systemically unwell (or if
symptoms worsen after two to three days of first-line antibiotic). Doxycycline or
clarithromycin should be prescribed in case of allergy to penicillin (refer to local guidelines).
Discuss management with an ENT surgeon.
Acute angle-closure
glaucoma
Usually unilateral; eye red and injected, visual acuity reduced due to corneal clouding, pupil
fixed. Refer urgently to Ophthalmology.
Giant cell arteritis
See text
Temporomandibular
joint disorder
A group of disorders affecting the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and the masticatory
muscles. Signs include limitation of jaw opening, tenderness to palpation of the TMJ and
palpable spasm of masseter and internal pterygoid muscles. Seek advice from an oral surgeon.
Cervicogenic
headache
Headache referred from disorders of the cervical spine.
Mucormycosis
Fungal infection may occur in severely immunocompromised patients. Periorbital and orbital
cellulitis cause orbital and facial pain, proptosis, purulent nasal discharge and mucosal necrosis.
Table 53.4  Acute headache with no abnormal signs.
Cause
Comment
Tension-type headache
Usually described as pressure or tightness around the head. Does not have the
associated symptoms or aura of migraine, although some patients may have both
types of headaches.
Migraine
See Table 53.5 for diagnostic criteria.
Medication-overuse
headache
Suspect in patients who have frequent or daily headaches and regularly use analgesics
for headache.
Drug-related
Seen with nitrates, nicorandil, dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, and sildenafil.
Toxin exposure
Seen with carbon monoxide poisoning.
Subarachnoid
haemorrhage
See text.
Giant cell arteritis
See text
Cerebral venous sinus
thrombosis
Headache frequently precedes other symptoms, and can be the only symptom. Onset
may be ‘thunderclap’, acute or progressive.
Pituitary apoplexy
Usually associated with ophthalmoplegia and reduced visual acuity.
Carotid or vertebral
arterial dissection
Unilateral headache, which may be accompanied by neck pain. May follow neck
manipulation or minor trauma. Usually accompanied by other signs (ischaemic stroke,
Horner syndrome or pulsatile tinnitus).
Spontaneous
intracranial
hypotension
Due to CSF leak from spinal meningeal defects or dural tears. Headache worse on
standing and relieved by lying down (like post-LP headache). May be accompanied by
nausea and vomiting, dizziness, auditory changes, diplopia, visual blurring,
interscapular pain and/or radicular pain in the arms or legs.
Benign (idiopathic)
‘thunderclap’
headache
Assumes subarachnoid haemorrhage and cerebral venous thrombosis have been
excluded.

<!-- page:407 -->
388
Acute Medicine
In the patient with headache, diagnostic tests should be chosen to answer targeted clinical questions.
Table 53.6 lists the relevant tests to request when specific diagnoses are suspected.
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Clinical features
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) manifests with sudden-onset, thunderclap headache, typically described
as the ‘worst ever’, reaching maximum intensity within minutes at most.
•	 Around 20% of patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage have acute headache with no other signs, but
most have associated photophobia with nausea and/or vomiting. There may be neck stiffness and, on examination, patients with SAH may have positive Kernig’s sign, suggestive of meningism.
Diagnosis
•	 SAH is diagnosed on the basis of clinical history, CT head, and CSF analysis if imaging does not show an
acute bleed. CT is most sensitive for detection of subarachnoid haemorrhage if done within 6 h of onset of
the headache. Examination of the CSF by spectrophotometry to detect bilirubin (a breakdown product of
Table 53.5  Diagnostic criteria for migraine.
Migraine without aura
•	 At least five attacks lasting 4–72 h (in some cases may be longer than 72 h – ‘status migrainosus’)
•	 At least two of the following:
•	 Unilateral
•	 Pulsating
•	 Moderate to severe
•	 Aggravated by movement
NB: migraine headache may be bilateral or vary unilateral/bilateral during a single episode, and may be continuous
rather than pulsatile.
•	 At least one associated symptom:
•	 Nausea or vomiting
•	 Photophobia or phonophobia
Migraine with aura
•	 One or more transient focal neurological aura symptoms
•	 Gradual development of aura symptoms over >4 min, or several symptoms in succession
•	 Aura symptoms last 4–60 min
•	 Headache follows or accompanies aura within 60 min
Table 53.6  Suspected diagnoses and investigation required.
Suspected diagnosis
Investigation
CNS infection
Full blood count, CRP, blood cultures (if fever), CT head, LP
Intracranial haemorrhage
CT head, coagulation screen
Giant cell arteritis (GCA)
ESR, C-reactive protein
Sinus infection
Skull X-ray
Subarachnoid
haemorrhage
CT head (high sensitivity within the first 6 h), LP (if no contraindication), CT angiogram
(if LP positive for xanthochromia)
Cerebral venous sinus
thrombosis
MR venogram (MRV), coagulation screen (subsequently targeted to investigate specific
coagulation disorders if suspected)
CRP, C-reactive protein; CVST, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; LP, lumbar
puncture.

<!-- page:408 -->
Headache syndromes: including subarachnoid haemorrhage and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
389
haemoglobin) is the most reliable method of confirming or excluding subarachnoid haemorrhage. Bilirubin
is reliably present in the CSF from 12 h to two weeks after haemorrhage (occasionally longer). Lumbar
puncture should therefore be delayed to over 12 h after the onset of headache unless meningitis is also
suspected.
•	 Once SAH is confirmed, the next step is to determine whether it is traumatic or non-traumatic, and imaging
(CT angiogram or MR angiogram) is necessary.
•	 Non-traumatic SAH is secondary to aneurysms (berry or infectious), coagulation disorders, uncontrolled
anticoagulation therapy, or dural arteriovenous fistulae (AVF).
Treatment
•	 Patients with confirmed SAH should be closely monitored in a high-dependency unit or ICU. The aims must
be strict blood pressure control, prevention of SAH complications, and treatment of the underlying cause.
Nimodipine should be commenced as soon as possible (PO/NG), usually 60 mg every 4 h if systolic BP is
>100 mmHg or 30 mg every 2 h if SBP <100 mg. If SAH is aneurysmal, urgent referral to neurosurgery is
needed for consideration of surgery (clipping or endovascular coiling, depending on site of the aneurysm,
clinical picture, comorbidities and local practice) and further management.
•	 Complications of SAH include acute hydrocephalus, rebleeding and vasospasm. Acute hydrocephalus occurs
from intraventricular extension of blood and subsequent obstruction of the cerebral aqueduct. Clinical manifestations include worsening headache, altered mental status, and coma. Hydrocephalus is treated with the
placement of an intraventricular shunt. Rebleeding tends to occur early on, if the aneurysm has not been
secured, and may cause mass effect if evacuation is not prompt and a haematoma forms, leading to uncal
herniation. Vasospasm can occur between 3 and 15 days from the bleeding (the risk is highest between days
5 and 10), can cause ischaemia and delayed infarcts, and is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in
patients who survive initial SAH. Symptoms of vasospasm include headache, nausea, vomiting, changes in
mental status, and focal neurological deficits. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound, CTA and digital subtraction
angiography may be helpful in the diagnosis of vasospasm.
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
Clinical features
•	 Headache is the most common symptom of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST), occurs in up to 90%
of cases, is the only manifestation in 25% of patients, and is due to raised intracranial pressure (ICP). CVST,
however, has a wide range of potential manifestations, including focal neurological deficits, isolated cranial
nerve palsies (most commonly VI palsy), seizures, altered mental status, and coma. CVST-related headache is
usually progressive over hours to days (occasionally thunderclap, presumably related to SAH then leading to
CVST), and worse lying flat. It can be localised or holocranial, and may have migrainous features. Patients
may also describe transient visual obscurations upon lying down or bending over.
•	 On examination, patients may have focal neurological deficits and/or papilloedema. If thrombosis occurs in
a cortical vein (not in a venous sinus), symptoms will typically be focal deficits (anatomically related) and/or
seizures, and raised ICP is less common.
Diagnosis
•	 Patients with suspected CVST require urgent CT + CT venogram or MR + MR venogram, to confirm the diagnosis. Imaging should be done in patients with new-onset, persistent, progressive headache that has positional features and does not improve with regular analgesia, with or without focal deficits or optic disc
swelling.
•	 Risk factors for CVST include pregnancy and puerperium, oral contraceptive pill, cancer and any prothrombotic states, ENT infections and known dural AVF.

<!-- page:409 -->
390
Acute Medicine
•	 Lumbar puncture to measure opening pressure (which would be pathologically raised in CVST, >20 cmH20)
is not required if the diagnosis can be made on the basis of imaging.
Treatment
•	 CVST is treated with anticoagulation, usually in the form of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) followed
by warfarin, and discussion with Haematology is advised. Still, there is not much evidence in using DOACs
in CVST. Anticoagulation should be lifelong for patients with underlying prothrombotic states.
•	 If the patient does not improve or worsen despite LMWH, local thrombolysis should be considered, and
referral to ICU and Neurosurgery made. Meanwhile, treat seizures and other associated symptoms.
Giant cell arteritis
•	 GCA should be considered in any patient aged 50 or over with headache, which will usually be of days or a
few weeks in duration.
•	 Associated symptoms include malaise, weight loss, jaw claudication, scalp tenderness and visual changes
(amaurosis fugax, diplopia and partial or complete loss of vision).
•	 If the ESR is >50 mm/h and/or CRP raised, or the temporal artery is thickened or tender (feel 2 cm above and
2 cm forward from the external auditory meatus), start prednisolone immediately. For patients with visual
symptoms give 60 mg as a one-off dose; these patients should be seen by an ophthalmologist the same day.
For those without visual symptoms, give 40–60 mg daily (minimum 0.75 mg/kg). Also give aspirin 75 mg
daily, if not contraindicated, and a proton pump inhibitor for gastroprotection.
•	 Arrange an urgent review by a rheumatologist.
Migraine
•	 Recurrent attacks, lasting minutes, of (usually unilateral) fully reversible visual, sensory or other CNS symptoms. These tend to develop gradually, followed by headache and associated migraine symptoms. The first
migraine headache usually occurs between the ages of 10 and 30.
•	 Aura symptoms may be visual, sensory, speech/language-related, motor, brainstem-related or retinal.
•	 Treatment of an acute attack is with an non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), triptan, dispersible
aspirin or paracetamol and an antiemetic, for example metoclopramide 10 mg IM or domperidone (available
in suppository form). Combination therapy with a triptan and NSAID/paracetamol may be more effective.
Further reading
Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). (2013) The international
classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition (beta version). Cephalalgia 33, 629–808. https://www.
ichd-3.org/.
Thilak S, Brown P, Whitehouse T, et al. (2024) Diagnosis and management of subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Nat Commun. 15(1), 1850. Published 2024 Feb 29. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-46015-2.
Ulivi L, Squitieri M, Cohen H, et al. (2020) Cerebral venous thrombosis: a practical guide. Pract Neurol. 20(5),
356–367. DOI: 10.1136/practneurol-2019-002415.
