# CHAPTER 55 Visual disturbance

- Pages: 415-423
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:415 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 55
396
The visual pathway extends from the cornea to the occipital cortex (Figure 55.1). Visual disturbance may occur
due to ocular, intracranial or systemic disease that requires prompt intervention to preserve sight. Clinical assessment (Table 55.1; Figure 55.2) will narrow the differential diagnosis and determine further management.
Visual disturbance
Tristan McMullan and Nimrath Kainth
CHAPTER 55
Left
Right
Field defect
Left
Right
Optic
nerve
Optic
chiasm
Pituitary
Fibres for
pupillary reﬂex
Optic tract
Midbrain
Lateral geniculate
Temporal lobe
radiation
Parietal lobe
radiation
Calcarine
cortex
Figure 55.1  Visual pathway. The visual pathway. Characteristic field defects seen with lesions at various sites along
the pathway are illustrated. The calcarine cortex in the occipital lobe is the location of the primary visual cortex. The
occipital lobes are supplied by the posterior cerebral arteries, terminal branches of the basilar artery. The pupillary
reflex is affected only if fibres proximal to the lateral geniculate body are damaged, or there is a lesion in the
midbrain or of the III nerve. Source: Weiner HL, Levitt LP (1978). Neurology for the house officer 2e. William and
Wilkins. Reproduced with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health.

<!-- page:416 -->
Visual disturbance
397
Table 55.1  Focused assessment of the patient with visual loss.
History
See text: establish if the visual loss was:
•	 Sudden or gradual
•	 In one or both eyes
•	 Persistent or transient
•	 In the central or peripheral field
•	 Painful or painless; if painful, ache or gritty
Associated headache, nausea or vomiting?
Has the patient noticed new ‘floaters’ or photopsia?
Other neuro-ophthalmic symptoms?
Symptoms suggestive of polymyalgia rheumatica/giant cell arteritis (malaise, lethargy, anorexia, weight loss, night
sweats, headache, occipital pain, jaw claudication, scalp tenderness)?
Other systemic symptoms?
Cardiovascular risk factors?
Past eye history, for example cataract surgery or previous uveitis; refractive state, myopic or hypermetropic?
Past medical history: diabetes? Thyroid disease? Immunosuppression? Connective tissue disease?
Drug history
Family history
Social history, to include occupation and driving and smoking status
Examination
Perform a general examination, with particular attention to heart, blood pressure, carotid and temporal arteries.
Eyes
•	 Red eye, discharge, photophobia, watering?
•	 Pupillary abnormalities?
•	 Ptosis, eyelid swelling, eyelid erythema, proptosis = exophthalmos?
•	 Nystagmus?
•	 Eye movements and assessment for diplopia
•	 Fundoscopy
Visual acuity
Check the visual acuity using a Snellen chart, in each eye, with the patient wearing their glasses or contact lenses, or
looking through a pinhole. If visual acuity is lower than can be measured by the Snellen chart, determine if the patient
can count fingers (CF), detect hand movement (HM) or perceive light (PL).
Visual fields
Visual field respecting the horizontal midline (i.e. superior or inferior defects) are seen with retinal vascular or optic
nerve disorders, including glaucoma. Defects respecting the vertical midline represent a neurological lesion such as a
stroke or compressive lesions.
Central defects are caused primarily by macular disease, such as age-related macular degeneration. In macular disease,
the patient experiences a positive scotoma, that is, a ‘spot’ in the vision is seen and reported. Conversely, in optic
nerve disease a negative scotoma is present, but not reported, that is, the defect is not ‘seen’ by the patient, but can
be detected on examination.
Amsler grid
This is used to assess macular function. The patient should wear their glasses or contact lenses with any reading
correction, if worn. Hold the grid at eye level around 33 cm away in good lighting. Cover one eye and ask the patient
to focus on the central dot with the uncovered eye, then repeat with the other eye. Distortion will be reported if there
is macular pathology (age-related macular degeneration or macular oedema). A central scotoma may be detected in
optic nerve disease.
Colour vision
Ask the patient to assess the colour quality of a bright red object (e.g. top of red pen). A relative difference between
the eyes indicates pathology affecting the optic nerve (e.g. optic neuritis); the red is desaturated or ‘washed out’ in
the affected eye.
(continued)

<!-- page:417 -->
398
Acute Medicine
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) should be considered in any patient over 50 with new-onset visual symptoms. It has
a varied presentation including transient visual loss (amaurosis fugax), persistent visual loss due to retinal or
optic nerve ischaemia (may rarely affect both eyes) or diplopia.
The history
Sudden versus gradual?
Sudden loss of vision typically (but not exclusively) reflects vascular disease, and gradual loss of vision, a
non-vascular disorder (Table 55.2).
Table 55.1  (Continued )
‘Swinging flash light’ test to detect a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD)
Normally, both pupils constrict symmetrically when a bright light is shone into one eye. When the torch is swung to the
other eye, the pupils remain the same size. A RAPD is present if the pupil dilates, when the torch is swung to the
affected eye. Both pupils constrict when the torch is swung back to the unaffected eye. A positive RAPD indicates severe
retinal and/or optic nerve injury in the affected eye.
Sudden visual loss
Transient
Both eyes
Persistent
Transient
Persistent
Ischaemia due to embolism
Ischaemia due to giant
cell arteritis
Retinal vasospasm
Early retinal detachment
Uveitis
Optic neuritis
Intermittent
angle-closure glaucoma
TIA, transient ischaemic attack
Acute angle-closure
glaucoma
Anterior uveitis
Endophthalmitis
Optic neuritis
Vitreous haemorrhage
Central/branch retinal
vein occlusion
Central/branch retinal
artery occlusion
Retinal detachment
Proliferative diabetic
retinopathy
Age-related macular
degeneration (wet)
Non-arteritic ischaemic
optic neuropathy
Arteritic ischaemic optic
neuropathy
Migraine with visual aura
Raised intracranial pressure
Posterior circulation TIA
Epilepsy (ictal or post-ictal)
Bilateral arteritic ischaemic
optic neuropathy in
giant-cell arteritis
Optic neuritis
Acute chiasmal lesion
Acute lesion affecting
optic tract, lateral
geniculate body, optic
radiations, or visual cortex
Bilateral occipital lobe
infarction
Reversible posterior
leukoencephalopathy
syndrome
One eye
Figure 55.2  Analysis of sudden visual loss.

<!-- page:418 -->
Visual disturbance
399
Unilateral versus bilateral?
Unilateral loss of vision indicates disease of that eye or optic nerve.
Bilateral visual loss occurs with systemic disease or focal disorders involving the visual pathway from the
optic chiasm back to the occipital cortex.
Patients may report loss of vision in only one eye, even though both eyes are affected; with a homonymous
hemianopia, the patient may only be aware of the visual loss in the eye with the temporal field defect, despite
having a nasal visual field defect in the fellow eye.
Persistent versus transient?
Sudden, painless and persistent loss of vision is usually due to ischaemia/infarction or haemorrhage at some
point along the visual pathway, but is also a feature of retinal detachment (Table 55.3). Sudden transient loss
of vision has a range of ocular, vascular and neurological causes (Table 55.4).
Table 55.2  Differential diagnosis of gradual visual loss.
Cause
Key features
(a)  Painful
Optic neuritis
Subacute but rapid profound visual loss, with gradual
recovery over six weeks.
May be pain on eye movements, particularly convergence.
Positive RAPD, if unilateral.
Reduced colour vision or red desaturation.
Central/centrocecal visual field defect.
May be history of multiple sclerosis.
Corneal epitheliopathy:
Pain, watering, photophobia.
Stains with fluorescein dye and visualised with blue light.
Corneal sensation will be reduced.
Herpes keratitis
May display characteristic dendritic ulcer.
Scleritis
Deep ache with ‘beefy’ redness of the eye (best seen in daylight)
Does not blanch with topical application of 10%
phenylephrine drops.
May be a history of connective tissue disease e.g.
rheumatoid arthritis.
(b)  Painless
Keratoconus, corneal dystrophies
Blurring of vision and loss of acuity.
May be family history.
Cataract
Gradual blurring/fogging of vision, glare and dazzle.
No distortion.
Post-cataract surgery: cystoid macular oedema
Central blurring of vision, usually four to six weeks
post-cataract surgery.
Posterior capsule opacification
Gradual fogging of vision post-cataract surgery.
Age-related macular degeneration (dry)
Decreased vision with loss of clarity – may be some distortion.
Diabetic maculopathy (exudative, ischaemic)
Decreased visual acuity and blurry vision.
Macular problems: epiretinal membrane, macular hole
Decreased vision with loss of clarity – some distortion likely.
Compressive optic neuropathy
Typically unilateral.
Insidious visual field loss that may become apparent when
the good eye is covered.
Positive RAPD and variable loss of colour vision.
Differential diagnosis: Thyroid orbitopathy
Drug-related: maculopathy, optic neuropathy
Decreased visual acuity and blurry vision.
(See Table 55.5)
AION, anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy; CF, counting fingers; CWS, cotton wool spot; HM, hand movements; NPL,
no perception of light; PL, perception of light; RAPD, relative afferent pupillary defect.

<!-- page:419 -->
400
Acute Medicine
Table 55.3  Differential diagnosis of sudden persistent visual loss.
Cause
Features
(a)  Painful
Acute angle-closure glaucoma
Sight-threatening, clinical emergency.
Unwell patient – nausea/vomiting, periocular pain and headache.
Congested eye with mid-dilated pupil.
Iris details hazy due to corneal oedema.
May be preceded by subacute attacks.
High intraocular pressure, for example >35 mmHg.
Likely hypermetropic = long sighted (patient’s glasses make their eyes look
bigger, to an observer, when worn)
Anterior uveitis
Brow ache, red eye – particularly perilimbal (around corneal limbus)
injection. Pupil will likely be constricted.
Hypopyon in severe cases.
Endophthalmitis
Sight-threatening, clinical emergency.
Post-operative endophthalmitis: within 2–14 days of surgery.
Pain, lid swelling, loss of vision, hypopyon.
Endogenous endophthalmitis: seek infective source, for example infected
central venous cannula, septic focus.
May be immunosuppressed.
Less of a hot eye.
Clinical emergency.
Optic neuritis
May affect one eye or both eyes.
Pain is less of a feature than visual loss. Maybe pain on eye movements.
RAPD, if unilateral.
Subacute dramatic vision loss over one to two days.
Swollen hyperaemic optic nerve when acute; optic disc pallor when
established. Visual field loss – typically central/centrocaecal.
Uhthoff’s sign – visual loss exacerbated by increased body temperature, for
example hot bath. Frequently associated with multiple sclerosis (MS):
25–72% will develop MS at 15 years, depending on MRI findings.
Subacute visual loss with pain on ocular movement and RAPD with field loss.
Colour vision profoundly affected.
May have MS or develop MS.
Neurology input required.
(b)  Painless affecting one eye
Vitreous haemorrhage
Sudden onset of floaters and blurred vision.
Red reflex may be absent if haemorrhage is significant.
No RAPD.
Caused by proliferative diabetic retinopathy, or retinal tear until proven
otherwise in non-diabetics.
Central/branch retinal vein occlusion
Often presents in the morning with variable visual loss from mild to
profound, depending on degree of ischaemia.
RAPD if ischaemic.
Dark blot haemorrhages in quadrants according to venous drainage involved
e.g. supero-temporal if BRVO, whole fundus if CRVO; hemi-vein occlusion will
cause haemorrhage in either superior or inferior retina.
Respects horizontal meridian if not CRVO (in which case whole retinal involved).

<!-- page:420 -->
Visual disturbance
401
Table 55.3  (Continued )
Cause
Features
Central/branch retinal artery
occlusion
Retinal pallor and oedema with profound visual loss.
May have cherry red spot if acute.
Cattle-tracking of blood cells in retinal arterioles (segmentation of blood
column denoting impaired, sluggish circulation).
RAPD.
Must exclude giant cell arteritis.
Cardiovascular work up and referral to stroke team.
Retinal detachment
Sight-threatening, clinical emergency.
May be preceded by flashes and floaters, symptomatic of posterior vitreous
separation/ detachment (PVD).
Field loss commensurate with retinal elevation – supero-temporal
detachment causing infero-nasal field loss.
White billowing retina seen on ophthalmoscopy.
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
May be asymptomatic until tractional retinal detachment or vitreous
haemorrhage supervene.
Venous new vessel proliferation at optic nerve or along arcades or in
watershed (ischaemic) area nasal to the optic nerve.
Other diabetic changes will be present.
If markedly asymmetric, consider coexisting carotid disease.
Age-related macular degeneration
(wet)
Central visual loss with haemorrhage +/− exudate in central macula.
May be bilateral.
Variable visual loss from 6/6 to hand movement vision.
Non-arteritic ischaemic optic
neuropathy (NAION)
Acute visual loss, typically in morning.
Swollen disc with haemorrhagic component.
RAPD, loss of colour vision and has associated field defect.
Younger age group, 45–65.
Small optic nerves, may be hypermetropic ‘disc at risk’
Arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy
(AION)
As above but chalky white optic disc.
Vision usually worse than NAION.
Older age group >50, typically >75.
May have associated symptoms and signs of giant-cell arteritis (but may be
‘silent’ GCA). If GCA suspected, treat with corticosteroid (see text).
AION, anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy; CF, counting fingers; CWS, cotton wool spot; HM, hand movements; NPL,
no perception of light; PL, perception of light; RAPD, relative afferent pupillary defect.
(c)  Affecting both eyes
Bilateral arteritic ischaemic optic
neuropathy (AION)
(As above)
Optic Neuritis
(As above)
Acute chiasmal lesion
May be infectious, inflammatory or vascular lesion. Pituitary apoplexy may
complicate pituitary adenoma (Chapter 48). Typically results in bi-temporal
hemianopia. III, IV or VI nerve palsies may be present if lesion extends into
cavernous sinus.
Acute lesion affecting optic tract,
the lateral geniculate body, the
optic radiations, or the visual cortex
May be due to cerebral infarction or haemorrhage, or haemorrhage into
brain tumour. Results in homonymous hemianopia.
Bilateral occipital lobe infarction
Due to posterior circulation stroke (see Chapter 56).
Reversible posterior
leukoencephalopathy syndrome
Typically presents with seizures. Other features include headache, altered
consciousness and visual abnormalities (e.g. blurred vision, homonymous
hemianopia, cortical blindness).
Psychogenic
Diagnosis of exclusion.

<!-- page:421 -->
402
Acute Medicine
Central versus peripheral visual field?
Central blurring or vision loss in one eye is typical of macular pathology (e.g. diabetic maculopathy).
Monocular peripheral visual loss may be due to retinal pathology (e.g. branch retinal vein/artery occlusion or
retinal detachment) or optic nerve disease (e.g. ischaemic optic neuropathy, optic neuritis, glaucoma).
Painful versus painless?
Pain in the eye usually indicates anterior eye disease (e.g. keratitis, anterior uveitis, primary angle-closure glaucoma). Optic neuritis and giant cell arteritis can cause visual loss, which may or may not be associated with
pain in the eye.
Painless loss of vision is typical of cataract, retinal disorders and disorders of the visual pathway.
Drug history
A careful drug history is essential as many drugs can cause transient or persistent visual loss (Table 55.5).
Table 55.4  Differential diagnosis of transient visual loss.
Cause
Typical duration/characteristic features
Affecting one eye
Amaurosis fugax
Typically 1–10 min
Like a shutter coming down
(Urgent referral to stroke team advised).
Ischaemia due to giant cell arteritis
Variable, may have preceding visual obscurations.
May affect nerve (AION), retina (CRAO) or ocular circulation as a
whole (ocular ischaemic syndrome).
May also cause motility disturbance – cranial nerve palsies/
extraocular muscles ischaemia.
Retinal vasospasm
Lasts 5–60 min
Migrainous features such as aura and headache.
Fortification spectra/scintillating scotoma are absent as they are
cortical phenomena and relate to cephalic migraine.
Early retinal detachment
Variable – progressively worse, painless.
Uveitis
Variable – progressively worse and more painful.
Optic neuritis
Subacute visual loss with hyperaemic optic nerve and features of
optic neuropathy: decreased colour vision, field loss and RAPD.
Intermittent angle-closure glaucoma
Brow ache and blurred vision – may get halos around lights and
feel nauseous.
Affecting both eyes
Migraine with visual aura
Lasts 10–30 min, migrainous features such as fortification spectra/
scintillating scotoma and headache.
Affects both eyes.
Raised intracranial pressure
Obscurations lasting seconds, which may be postural.
Headache and other features of raised ICP.
Bilateral disc swelling with preserved visual function (i.e. normal
colour vision) in early stages.
Enlarged blind spot in early stages.
Posterior circulation transient ischaemic
attack affecting visual cortex
Lasts 1–10 min.
Epilepsy (ictal or post-ictal)
Ictal: 3–5 min.
Post-ictal: 20 min.

<!-- page:422 -->
Visual disturbance
403
Further management
Visual loss due to suspected eye disease
Seek urgent advice from an ophthalmologist.
Suspected giant cell arteritis
If there is persistent visual loss, seek urgent advice from an ophthalmologist. IV methylprednisolone can be
given.
If there has been transient visual loss in suspected GCA, prescribe prednisolone 60 mg PO. The patient
should be reviewed by an ophthalmologist the same day. Consider starting aspirin 75 mg daily, unless there are
contraindications such as active peptic ulceration or a bleeding disorder. Proton-pump inhibitors (PPI) should
be provided for prophylaxis against peptic ulceration. Osteoporotic fracture risk should be assessed and bone
protection therapy prescribed as appropriate.
Central and branch retinal artery occlusion
See urgent advice from an ophthalmologist.
Complete a full cardiovascular examination and record an ECG. Assess cardiovascular risk factors. Arrange
an echocardiogram and carotid duplex scan to determine if there is an embolic source. Check full blood count,
C-reactive protein ESR, blood glucose, biochemical profile and lipids. A referral to the stroke team should also
be made and initiation of antiplatelet therapy should be considered.
Amaurosis fugax presents with transient visual loss, typically with a curtain appearing over the vision without
pain. It should be managed as for CRAO and patients discussed with a stroke physician. See Chapter 56 for
further management of amaurosis fugax/transient ischaemic attack.
GCA should always be considered in patients presenting with suspected CRAO or amaurosis fugax.
Central and branch retinal vein occlusion
Complete a full cardiovascular examination and record an ECG.
Consider diabetes and hyperviscosity syndromes (check full blood count and serum protein electrophoresis).
In younger patients consider thrombophilia. Hypertension is the main risk factor but screen for other cardiovascular risk factors. Consider antiplatelet therapy if not contraindicated.
Arrange follow-up with an ophthalmologist.
Table 55.5  Drugs causing visual symptoms.
Drug
Comment
Amiodarone
Corneal verticillata – asymptomatic, optic neuropathy rarely.
Corticosteroids
Raised intraocular pressure/glaucoma. Cataract.
Ethambutol
Toxic optic neuropathy.
Hydroxychloroquine
Maculopathy.
Isotretinoin
Dry eye, IIH.
Phenothiazines
Blurred vision from anticholinergic effect, pigment deposition in skin, cornea and
lens. Pigmented retinopathy.
Sildenafil
Blue vision/NAION
Tamoxifen
Crystalline maculopathy.
Topiramate
Angle closure glaucoma, periorbital oedema, acute onset myopia.
Vigabatrin
Visual field defects.

<!-- page:423 -->
404
Acute Medicine
Optic neuritis
In most patients with optic neuritis complicating multiple sclerosis, symptoms resolve spontaneously, with
recovery starting within 10 days and usually complete by six weeks. Corticosteroid therapy (methylprednisolone IV) may accelerate recovery but does not alter long-term outcomes.
Seek urgent advice from an ophthalmologist.
Further reading
Biousse V, Newman NJ. (2015) Ischemic optic neuropathies. N Engl J Med 372, 2428–2436. DOI: 10.1056/
NEJMra1413352.
Lemos J, Eggenberger E. (2015) Neuro-ophthalmological emergencies. The Neurohospitalist 5, 223–233.
Sawaya R, El Ayoubi N, Hamam R. (2015) Acute neurological visual loss in young adults: causes, diagnosis
and management. Postgrad Med J 91, 698–703. DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133071.
