# CHAPTER 58 Peripheral neuropathy (acute and chronic)

- Pages: 445-447
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:445 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 58
426
Peripheral neuropathies result from damage and/or dysfunction of the peripheral nerves. This produces various
combinations and patterns of motor weakness, large- and small-fibre sensory loss, ataxia, positive sensory
symptoms, neuropathic pain, and autonomic, cranial or neuromuscular respiratory dysfunction.
Pathology may affect the axon, myelin and/or node of Ranvier (nodopathy). Pathology affecting the cell
bodies (neuronopathy) is usually considered separately.
Priorities
Prompt identification of patients:
•	 With rapidly progressive, treatable neuropathies (Box 58.1)
•	 With or at risk of developing bulbar dysfunction or neuromuscular respiratory failure
The clinical assessment is summarized in Table 58.1. Features making certain aetiologies more likely are
given in Table 58.2.
Peripheral neuropathy
(acute and chronic)
Simon Rinaldi and Roberto Bellanti
CHAPTER 58
•	 The most common peripheral neuropathies are late-onset, slowly progressive, length-dependent,
symmetrical and sensory axonal in nature. The overwhelming majority of these will not produce significant disability, many will not have an identifiable cause, and only limited further investigation is
typically appropriate.
•	 Red flags for more concerning pathology and/or a specific identifiable or modifiable cause include:
•	 Acute onset and/or rapidly progressive (over days to weeks).
•	 Prominent or proximal weakness (e.g. hip flexion and/or shoulder abduction).
•	 Prominent ataxia
•	 Asymmetric, non-length dependent, focal or multifocal pattern.
•	 Neuropathy causing significant disability or impaired mobility.
•	 Autonomic dysfunction (outside of diabetic neuropathy).
•	 Global areflexia
•	 Onset before 55 years old and/or a positive family history.
Box 58.1  Peripheral neuropathies – alerts.

<!-- page:446 -->
Peripheral neuropathy (acute and chronic)
427
Diagnostic tests are directed by the clinical picture. In the absence of any red flags, a simple set of
screening bloods (FBC, U&Es, LFTs, TFTs, glucose/HbA1c, vitamin B12, paraprotein screen, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and fasting lipids) is typically sufficient and neurophysiology is not required.
Many polyneuropathies are sensory > motor, symmetric, length-dependent and slowly progressive.
Table 58.2  Clues to the pathology.
Characteristic
Potential causes
Acute (evolving over hours to days)
GBS, vasculitic, toxic, infectious, nutritional
Focal/multifocal
Vasculitic, compressive, amyloid, neoplastic, infectious, sarcoid, genetic (HNPP),
inflammatory (MMN/MADSAM)
Autonomic involvement
Diabetes, amyloid, GBS/autoimmune
(Sensory) ataxia
Vitamin B12 deficiency, MFS/anti-MAG, dorsal root ganglionopathy (Sjogren’s,
lymphoma, paraneoplastic), vitamin B6 toxicity
Small fibre
Diabetes, amyloid, HIV
GBS; Guillain-Barré syndrome, HNPP; Hereditary Neuropathy with Pressure Palsies, MMN; Multifocal Motor Neuropathy,
MADSAM; Multifocal Acquired Demyelinating Sensory and Motor Neuropathy, MFS; Miller Fisher Syndrome, anti-MAG;
anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein.
Table 58.1  Focused assessment of the patient with suspected peripheral neuropathy.
History
Age? Onset? Progression? Aggravating/relieving factors? Triggers?
Distribution? Length dependent? Focal? Multifocal? Symmetrical? Asymmetrical?
Weakness? Distal and/or proximal?
Sensory symptoms/dysfunction? Numbness? Paraesthesia? Pain? Burning? Sensory ataxia (worse in dark/eyes closed)?
Autonomic involvement? Postural light-headedness? Syncope? Dry mouth? Constipation/(nocturnal) diarrhoea?
Sweating abnormalities?
Cranial nerve involvement? Diplopia? Dysarthria? Dysphagia?
Neuromuscular respiratory involvement?
Functional impairment?
Prodromal illness or infection? Trauma? Compression? Arising from sleep?
Background
Systemic upset? Weight loss? Diet/malnutrition? Alcohol/drug/toxin exposure?
Past neurological or systemic disease?
Diabetes? Vascular risk factors? Family history?
Examination
Rapid assessment of ABC/vital signs/glucose. Check vital capacity if GBS possible
Assess visual function and cranial nerves
Assess for any weakness, and alteration of tone and reflexes (Chapter 54)
Check small (pain/temperature) and large fibre (vibration/proprioception/light touch) modalities
Look for other signs of proprioceptive loss. Rombergism? Pseudoathetosis?
Provocation tests if appropriate (Phalen’s/Tinnel’s/Spurling’s). Assess for autonomic dysfunction (Lying and standing BP,
heart rate variability)

<!-- page:447 -->
428
Acute Medicine
Further management
•	 Further management is directed by the working diagnosis.
•	 Neuropathies may predispose to injury and falls, and these risks need to be evaluated and addressed.
•	 Neuropathic pain usually responds poorly to standard analgesic preparations, typically requiring neuropathic
pain agents such as amitriptyline, gabapentin and/or pregabalin.
Further reading
Dyck PJ, Dyck PJ, Grant IA, Fealey RD. (1996) Ten steps in characterizing and diagnosing patients with
peripheral neuropathy. Neurology 47(1), 10–17. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.1.10.
