# CHAPTER 59 Guillain–Barré syndrome

- Pages: 448-452
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:448 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
429
Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute, immune-mediated neuropathy. Typical cases are characterized by
largely symmetric, post-infectious, ascending weakness with arreflexia. Cranial nerve palsy (especially facial),
pain and sensory symptoms are common, sensory signs less so. By definition, progression of weakness ceases
within four weeks of onset. Nadir is reached earlier than this in most cases.
GBS has become the most common cause of acquired neuromuscular paralysis. GBS follows infection
in  approximately two-thirds of cases. Most often the infection is of upper respiratory tract, although
Campylobacter jejuni (causing gastroenteritis) is the most frequently identified prodromal agent.
Miller–Fisher syndrome (MFS), characterized by a triad of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and areflexia, is usually
considered a regional variant of GBS, but is significantly less common. Other regional and overlap syndromes
are also described.
The recovery phase in GBS can be extremely long, and at least 20% of patients fail to return to their
premorbid baseline. Nevertheless, continuing improvement is possible even at two years from the initial
presentation.
The risk of recurrent GBS is small but significant, at around 5%. Occasionally a further deterioration after
initial improvement can represent a fluctuation related to the acute treatment ‘wearing off’, or indicate an
alternative diagnosis such as chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP).
Consider GBS in patients with progressive symmetrical limb or facial weakness. Management of the patient
with suspected GBS is summarized in Figure 59.1.
Priorities
The priorities are to establish the diagnosis in a timely manner (Tables 59.1 and 59.2; Box 59.1), exclude
potential mimics (Table 59.3), and institute appropriate monitoring and therapy to manage or prevent potential complications.
Immediate management
•	 Promptly involve ICU if there is respiratory failure or autonomic dysfunction (the latter usually manifesting
with labile blood pressure, refractory hypo/hypertension or cardiac arrhythmias).
•	 Monitoring cardiorespiratory function, including measurement of vital capacity with bedside spirometry, is
an absolute requirement in the safe management of patients with GBS. Frequent monitoring is required
during the initial phase, when the disease is still progressive.
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Simon Rinaldi and Roberto Bellanti
CHAPTER 59

<!-- page:449 -->
430
Acute Medicine
•	 An adult vital capacity of <1.5 L/<20 mL/kg is of immediate concern and warrants discussion with ICU.
•	 At <1 L/<15 mL/kg, or with a fall of 50% from baseline on serial testing, prompt ICU involvement is
imperative, and intubation may be necessary.
•	 Peak expiratory flow or arterial blood gas measurements are inadequate for assessing neuromuscular
respiratory compromise.
Discuss with ICU
Monitor vital capacity, cardiovascular function, power
Transfer to HDU/CU if severe weakness, respiratory compromise,
autonomic disturbance, or rapid progression
Review analgesic requirement, thromboprophylaxis
and swallow if not already done
Discuss with neurology – consider Mg or plasma exchange
(see text for further details)
Therapy, monitoring
and follow up as
directed by diagnosis
GBS
diagnosis
made
Consider investigations to
support diagnosis
(NCS, LP, serology)
Is GBS the only
tenable diagnosis?
Consider further investigations and other
causes as appropriate (see text)
Revisit history and examination if needed
Alternative
diagnosis
made?
Treat and investigate as
appropriate (see Endocrine/
Metabolic emergencies
Section 5-Endocrine and
Metabolic disorders
Severe
biochemical
 derangement?
Arrange other investigations as detailed
in text.
Spinal cord or
cauda equina pathology
possible?
Urgent MRI
spine
Non-GBS
diagnosis
conﬁrmed?
VC <1.5 L or
<20 mL/kg or
<50% predicted
Obtain further history and
perform examination as
detailed in text
Manage as appropriate
(see also Spinal Cord
Compression Chapter 66)
Assess and stabilize airway, breathing and circulation.
Check vital capacity.
Suspected GBS
(Typically post-infections, progressive, ascending,
symmetrical weakness with areﬂexia)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Figure 59.1  Management of suspected Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).

<!-- page:450 -->
Guillain–Barré syndrome
431
Table 59.1  Clinical assessment.
History
Prodromal illness (GI or respiratory)? Other potential trigger?
Backpain? Weakness? Sensory disturbance? Autonomic symptoms? Sphincter disturbance? Ataxia? Diplopia?
Dysphagia? Dysarthria?
Onset? Progression? Fever? Rash? Ongoing systemic upset?
Prior episodes? Past history/comorbidities? HIV? Haematological malignancy? Tick bite? Alcohol excess? Poor diet?
Travel? Toxin/heavy metal exposure? Drugs?
Red flags for alternative diagnosis?
Hyperacute onset, marked fluctuation/fatigability, sphincter disturbance at onset, persistent bowel/bladder
dysfunction, progression greater than four weeks from onset, neurological dysfunction developing concurrently
with systemic upset.
Examination
Supportive findings:
•	 Largely symmetrical, proximal and distal flaccid limb weakness.
•	 Areflexia: bilateral facial palsy +/− other cranial nerve palsies; autonomic dysfunction.
Examination red flags for alternative diagnosis: marked asymmetry; upper motor neuron signs; sensory level; rash;
fever; fatigable weakness.
Table 59.2  Investigation in suspected Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).
Test
Comment
CSF analysis
CSF protein is usually elevated, but may be normal, especially early in the disease course.
CSF lymphocyte count >10/mm3 is unusual, and counts >50/mm3 are ‘never’ seen in
GBS, such that alternative diagnoses (haematological malignancy, HIV, Borrelia) must
be strongly considered in this setting.
MRI spine
Mandatory if spinal cord/cauda equina compression is in the differential (see Figure 59.1).
Nerve conduction
studies/electromyography
(NCS/EMG)
Can support the diagnosis by demonstrating an (acute) neuropathy.
Blood tests
All patients: FBC, electrolytes (including calcium, phosphate and magnesium), LFTs,
glucose, paraprotein screen, CK, TFTs, ESR.
In selected patients: Anti-ganglioside antibodies, serological tests for prodromal
infections, ANA/ANCA, anti-AChR, anti-VGCC, thiamine.
Table 59.3  Causes of acute weakness.
Site
Causes
Brain
Stroke, mass lesion, rhombencephalitis, central pontine myelinolysis
Spinal cord
Spinal cord/cauda equina/root compression (see Chapter 66), transverse myelitis, anterior spinal
artery occlusion, Haematomyelia
Poliomyelitis, rabies
Peripheral nerve
GBS, critical illness neuropathy, toxic (heavy metals, biological toxins or drug intoxication),
nutritional (dry beriberi), acute intermittent porphyria, vasculitis (with mononeuritis multiplex),
lymphomatous or carcinomatous (radiculo)neuropathy, diphtheria
Neuromuscular
junction
Myasthenia gravis, Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome, Botulism
Biological or industrial toxins
Muscle
Hypokalaemia, hypophosphataemia, hypomagnesaemia, inflammatory myopathy, critical illness
myopathy, acute rhabdomyolysis (see Chapter 86)
Periodic paralyses

<!-- page:451 -->
432
Acute Medicine
•	 Treat pain. Paracetamol and opioids can be used, but neuropathic pain agents (e.g. gabapentin, pregabalin
and amitriptyline) are often required.
•	 Prevent complications: thromboprophylaxis, pressure area care, assess swallow and place nil by mouth
(with feeding by nasogastric tube) if compromised.
•	 Consider disease-modifying treatment: IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) (0.4 g/kg × 5 days) or plasma exchange
(PLEx), in discussion with a neurologist.
Monitoring
Close monitoring of cardiorespiratory function is required initially. As a minimum, two sets of observations an
hour apart, including measurement of vital capacity, are suggested following the initial presentation. In the
rapidly deteriorating patient, even more frequent assessment may be appropriate.
Selection of patients for ambulatory care, hospital admission
and HDU/ICU admission
•	 All patients in the progressive phase of the disease will require admission for monitoring as a minimum.
•	 Non-ambulant patients and those with cardiovascular autonomic involvement should usually be monitored
in a high-dependency setting at least.
•	 With evidence of neuromuscular respiratory compromise and/or pronounced cardiovascular autonomic
instability involvement of ICU is recommended.
Risk-assessment models
Risk of mechanical ventilation can be assessed by the modified Erasmus GBS Respiratory Insufficiency Score
(mEGRIS). Such risk is greater in patients with rapid disease progression in the first four weeks, bulbar palsy,
and weakness of neck flexion and hip flexion. Overall, around one in four patients with GBS will require
intubation.
Long-term prognosis (the probability of being unable to walk independently at four weeks, three months
and six months) can be calculated by the modified Erasmus GBS Outcome Score (mEGOS). Both are available
via https://gbsstudies.erasmusmc.nl/tools
The more common diagnostic pitfalls relate to distinguishing GBS from spinal cord or cauda equina
syndromes. Acute (radiculo-) neuropathies related to nutritional deficiency, critical illness, haematological
malignancy, infection or vasculitis are also occasional mimics.
Confusion also sometimes surrounds the concept of ascending weakness. Proximal weakness is usually
found in an affected limb, and the typical progression is from legs to arms to cranial nerves and respiratory
muscles – not from distal to proximal in individual limbs. Exceptions exist, but descending weakness
(starting with the cranial musculature) should prompt thoughts of botulism, not GBS.
Box 59.1  Pitfalls in the diagnosis of Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).

<!-- page:452 -->
Guillain–Barré syndrome
433
Further management
•	 Patients who fail to improve after IVIg do not benefit from a second immunoglobulin dose, as this increases
the risk of side effects (mainly thromboembolic) without improving neurological outcome. There is no
evidence to support the use of plasma exchange after IVIg, or vice versa, in this situation. However,
further therapy may be indicated in the context of a ‘treatment-related fluctuation’ (improvement then
deterioration after treatment) or with ongoing progression beyond eight (and perhaps four) weeks
(implying another, non-GBS diagnosis).
•	 For patients in the plateau or recovery phase of their disease, pain management, pressure area care and
thromboprophylaxis remain important. Fatigue and low mood are also common problems which may require
treatment. Input from physiotherapy is extremely valuable in maintaining and then improving mobility and
functional ability. With the aid of occupational therapy, discharge home might be considered at this time,
with or without an intermediate period spent in a specialist rehabilitation setting as appropriate.
Patient support groups
http://www.gaincharity.org.uk/
http://www.gbs-cidp.org/
Further reading
Bellanti R, Rinaldi S. (2024) Guillain-Barré syndrome: a comprehensive review. Eur J Neurol 31(8), e16365.
doi: 10.1111/ene.16365.
van Doorn PA, Van den Bergh PYK, Hadden RDM, et al. (2023) European Academy of Neurology/Peripheral
Nerve Society guideline on diagnosis and treatment of Guillain-Barré syndrome. Eur J Neurol 30(12),
3646–3674.
