# CHAPTER 60 Multiple sclerosis

- Pages: 453-460
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:453 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 60
434
Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common cause of non-traumatic central nervous system disease and longterm disability in young adults in Europe, Canada and the United States. According to MS society statistics,
approximately 1 in every 500 people in the UK lives with MS with over 130 people a week being diagnosed
with the condition. It is an immune-mediated disease of the central nervous system, first described by Charcot
in 1868 as ‘la sclèrose en plaques disseminées’ whereby demyelination occurs in the brain and spinal cord.
Risk factors associated with developing MS are found in Box  60.1. At diagnosis, most patients have
relapsing–remitting MS (RRMS) (85–90%). There is currently no cure. The aim of disease-modifying therapies
is to prevent new demyelination from occurring. Natural history studies estimate that two-thirds would become
secondary progressive (progressive neurological decline without relapses) however this is likely to be reduced
with the emergence of disease-modifying therapies. A small subset of patients (10–15%) have primary progressive disease at onset.
Historically on the acute medical take, the general physician might see first presentations of demyelinating
disease (transverse myelitis, brain stem syndrome and optic neuritis), a fresh bout of new inflammation (i.e.
relapse) or managing the complications of progressive disease (urosepsis and the comorbidity of immobility).
Multiple sclerosis
Gina Hadley and Gabriele C. De Luca
CHAPTER 60
•	 Age (commonly affects individuals between 16 and 45 years with a peak onset in early thirties).
•	 Sex (Female : Male ratio > 2 : 1, but is variable).
•	 Certain infections (Epstein–Barr virus).
•	 Race
•	 Smoking
•	 Obesity
•	 Certain autoimmune diseases
•	 Climate (Increases with distance from equator (Orkney and Shetland  –  300/100,000,
England – 100+/100,000, Tropics – 2–5/100,000)).
•	 Vitamin D
•	 Family history of MS and other autoimmune conditions
•	 Genetics (HLA class II region (HLA-DRB1*15 haplotype with greatest odds ratio)) with many non-HLA
loci implicated.
Box 60.1  Risk factors for multiple sclerosis.

<!-- page:454 -->
Multiple sclerosis
435
A person with MS with infection or other systemic disturbance may present with worsening pre-existing symptoms (i.e. pseudo-relapse). Now the scope extends into complications of potentially highly immunosuppressive
disease-modifying therapies and their sequalae. This chapter will cover diagnosis, relapse, treatment and
complications.
Initial presentation and diagnosis
A diagnosis of MS requires demonstration that inflammatory demyelinating lesions are disseminated in space
and time. (see Table 60.1 for Revised McDonald criteria 2017 for diagnosis of RRMS). The first clinical episode
of CNS inflammatory demyelination is always isolated in time (monophasic) and usually isolated in space
(monofocal). When examining the patient, supporting evidence localising to the central nervous system would
be a relative afferent pupillary defect, upper motor neuron signs (e.g. a pyramidal distribution of weakness
[upper limbs, extensors weaker than flexors and lower limbs flexors weaker than extensors], velocity-dependent
increased tone, hyperreflexia and up going plantars), brainstem signs (e.g. internuclear ophthalmoplegia),
cerebellar signs and gait impairment.
Clinical history can give dissemination in time and space. Dissemination in time can be ascertained by taking
a history covering clinical symptoms localising to the central nervous system: optic neuritis, partial myelitis,
sensory disturbance (limb, abdominal and chest), brainstem – intranuclear ophthalmoplegia, tinnitus/hearing
loss, facial sensory disturbance (including trigeminal neuralgia), etc. lasting for at least 24 h with a month
between a previous bout of symptoms.
Patients must have an MRI scan of the brain and spinal cord with dissemination in space criteria being fulfilled if at least 2 of 4 MS-typical regions (periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial and spinal cord). Optic
nerve pathology will likely soon be added as a space criterion. Dissemination in time can be ascertained on
imaging if there are two scans taken at different time points with an increase in lesions consistent with inflammatory demyelination between them. Alternatively, if contrast is given and there is enhancement with background non-enhancing lesions, then one scan would be sufficient. Oligoclonal bands can also give dissemination
in time.
Table 60.1  Revised McDonald criteria 2017 for diagnosis of RRMS.
Dissemination in time
Dissemination in space
i.  ≥2 attacks separated by at least 1 month or
ii.  Simultaneous presence of asymptomatic
gadolinium-enhancing and non-enhancing lesions at
any time or
iii.  A new T2 and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion on
follow-up MRI irrespective of its timing with
reference to a baseline scan
iv.  Demonstration of CSF-specific OCBs (as a non-MRI
method for DIT)
i.  Objective clinical evidence of ≥2 lesions or objective
clinical evidence of 1 lesion with reasonable historical
evidence of a prior attack involving a different
CNS site or
ii.  ≥1 T2 lesion in at least 2 of 4 MS-typical regions of the
CNS (periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial and
spinal cord)
About 10–15% of people with MS do not have discreet attacks but rather an insidious accumulation of disability from
the outset. This phenotype, primary progressive MS, typically presents in people over 40 years old when medical
co-morbidities, such as vascular risk factors, are more common, which sometimes makes the diagnosis more
challenging. Dissemination in space and time criteria also applies with slight alteration as outlined in Table 60.2.
Source: Adapted from Thompson et al., 2018.

<!-- page:455 -->
436
Acute Medicine
Table 60.2  Revised McDonald criteria 2017 for diagnosis of PPMS.
Required
AND any two of the following
Continued progression for >12 mo
One or more MRI detected brain lesions typical of MS OR
Two or more MRI detected spinal lesions typical of MS OR
Oligoclonal bands in the cerebrospinal fluid
It is important to consider mimics. Table 60.3 covers typical features of neurological symptoms associated
with MS and atypical symptoms which should raise suspicion of an alternative diagnosis (Box 60.2).
Source: Adapted from Thompson et al., 2018.
Table 60.3  Neurological symptoms.
Typical features
Atypical features
Optic nerve
•	 Optic neuritis in one eye
•	 Mild pain on eye movement
•	 Reduced visual acuity and reduced colour vision
•	 Normal disc or mild disc swelling
•	 Improvement begins within three weeks from
onset
•	 Afferent pupillary defect
•	 Optic neuritis in both eyes at the same time
•	 Painless or very severe pain
•	 No perception of light
•	 Severe haemorrhages and exudates
•	 Extended loss of vision
•	 Vitritis and neuroretinitis
•	 Photophobia
Brainstem or
cerebellum
•	 Bilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia
•	 Ataxia and gaze-evoked nystagmus
•	 Sixth nerve palsy (in patients aged 20–40 years)
•	 Paroxysmal phenomena (occurring for at least 24 h)
•	 Multifocal signs (e.g. facial sensory loss and
vertigo)
•	 Trigeminal neuralgia in a young person
•	 Complete external ophthalmoplegia
•	 Vascular territory signs
•	 Progressive trigeminal sensory neuropathy
•	 Movement disorders
•	 Fluctuating ocular or bulbar weakness or both
Spinal cord
•	 Incomplete transverse myelitis
•	 Lhermitte’s sign
•	 Sphincter symptoms
•	 Asymmetric limb weakness and sensory
alteration
•	 Deafferented hand
•	 Progression to nadir between 4 h and 21 d
•	 Complete transverse myelitis
•	 Complete Brown-Séquard syndrome
•	 Cauda equina syndrome
•	 Anterior spinal artery territory lesion
•	 Localised or radicular spinal pain
•	 Progressive and symmetrical spastic paraparesis
or progressive sensory ataxia (from involvement
of posterior columns)
•	 Sharp level to all sensory modalities
•	 Areflexia
Vascular – Strokes or cerebral small vessel disease (these can cause non-specific white matter changes
on MRI).
Infection – Syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus 1, human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1 and 2 serology.
Nutritional and endocrine – vitamin B12, copper and thyroid function.
Other inflammatory – Neuro-Behçet’s, sarcoid, systemic autoimmune disease (anti-nuclear antibody,
ESR, Ro/La, SCL-70).
Other neurological – e.g. Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (anti-aquaporin-4 and anti-myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody screening).
Box 60.2  Multiple sclerosis mimics to consider.

<!-- page:456 -->
Multiple sclerosis
437
Relapse
A relapse is defined as the emergence of new neurological symptoms (see Box 60.3) that last for more than
24 h that occur more than 30 d after a prior relapse. Symptoms reach maximal intensity approximately 24–60 h
after onset but may progress slowly over 1–2 weeks. Exacerbation of existing symptoms are common and
Box 60.4 covers triggers that can precipitate a ‘pseudorelapse’ – there is no new inflammatory demyelination
but areas of existing damage have lower thresholds for unmasking prior symptoms.
An exacerbation of existing symptoms could include urinary problems, sensory issues, headaches and balance issues, visual, auditory or swallowing problems, limb weakness, neuropathic pain, a deterioration in
walking distance and intractable vomiting. It is important to search for common triggers of pseudorelapse,
which when addressed can improve symptoms. Patients with progressive MS may present with complications
of bladder disturbance and immobility.
Treatment of an acute relapse
If a pseudorelapse has been excluded, NICE (2022) recommends a short course of high-dose methylprednisolone (500 mg daily for 5 days orally or 1 g daily for 3 days intravenously) within 14 days of onset for symptoms
that are not spontaneously improving. It should be emphasised that steroids hasten recovery but their effect
on outcomes is less certain. There are risks with high-dose steroids that depend on the age and comorbidities
of the patient but include and are not limited to gastritis (a short course of proton pump inhibitors may be
indicated), a metallic taste, insomnia, mood changes, psychosis, arrhythmias, femoral avascular necrosis and
multiple courses may increase osteoporosis risk. Steroids also impair glucose intolerance and increase risk of
infection.
•	 Optic neuritis (pain on eye movement, colour desaturation and visual loss).
•	 Brainstem syndrome (e.g. intranuclear ophthalmoplegia [INO], cranial nerve palsy and long-tract
signs).
•	 Cerebellar syndrome (ataxia, slurred speech, nystagmus, dysmetria (intention tremor on finger to
nose) and problems with heel to shin).
•	 Spinal cord syndrome (motor, sensory and sphincteric disturbance).
Box 60.3  Common relapses.
•	 Ambient heat (Uhthoff’s phenomenon)
•	 Infection
•	 Stress (emotional or physical)
•	 Fatigue and sleep disturbance
•	 Biochemical/metabolic imbalance
•	 Constipation
Box 60.4  Triggers for exacerbation of existing symptoms.

<!-- page:457 -->
438
Acute Medicine
Disease modifying therapy
An expanding number of disease-modifying therapies are for people with MS. Choice of disease-modifying
therapy depends on disease activity (e.g. clinical relapses or new T2 lesions on MRI), patient co-morbidity and
preference. The MS Trust has an excellent resource ‘MS Decisions’ that describes and compares each diseasemodifying therapy. Table 60.4 describes the mechanism of action, route of administration, major side effects
and ‘expected’ abnormal blood results to help the acute physician balance probabilities of diagnoses based on
the known side effects of the drugs. Since these drugs are administered in hospital or delivered by a Home
Care company, they are unlikely to appear on a list of medications from the GP’s surgery and should specifically
be asked for. The majority of disease-modifying therapies are available for RRMS, there are two options for
secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS) with clinical or radiological activity and one option for primary
progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS).
Serious side effects
Side effects of these medications can come with a mortality risk. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML) becomes more common in patients on natalizumab (Tysabri) after two years of treatment if they have JC
virus (John Cunningham virus [human polyomavirus 2]) in their blood, especially at high titres. Symptoms of
PML include altered mental status, progressive motor deficits, limb and gait ataxia, visual symptoms (diplopia
and hemianopia) and seizures. It is also a risk in patients with low lymphocytes on dimethylfumerate (Tecfidera)
and rarely with Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor modulators (fingolimod, siponimod, posenimod and
ozanimod).
Discontinuation of S1P receptor modulators has been associated with life-threatening rebound syndrome as
lymphocytes are no longer sequestered in the lymph nodes. This occurs 2–26 weeks (median 9 weeks) after
cessation of therapy with clinical symptoms including motor, brainstem or cerebellar and/or sensory symptoms.
Radiographic activity can involve multiple enhancing (active) lesions and large, tumefactive lesions. Rebound
syndrome can be fatal.
S1P receptor modulators can also be sight-threatening due to macula oedema and there should be a low
threshold for ophthalmology review with visual symptoms.
Alemtuzumab is not widely used as serious side effects have emerged. Patients can be receiving infusions as
day cases and hence may present overnight with infusion reactions including acute coronary syndrome, cerebrovascular events and pulmonary haemorrhage. Autoimmune thrombocytopenia can be an early complication (platelets measured on day 3 in the infusion protocol as a precaution). Later secondary autoimmunity can
involve the liver and thyroid.
Multiple sclerosis in older adults
As people with MS age, they have an age-dependent propensity to develop co-morbidities (e.g. vascular
disease) and other diseases (e.g. malignancy). Recent evidence points towards those with MS having a
greater (1.5×) propensity to cardiovascular disease, which, in turn, is associated with greater disability. The
first presentation of a band of sensory changes in the chest in a 65-year-old patient who smokes has high
blood pressure, raised cholesterol and a family history of cardiovascular disease who has MS is having
cardiac chest pain until proven otherwise. Sudden onset neurological symptoms in a patient with vascular
co-morbidity should place stroke higher on the differential than a relapse. Pre-test probability is an
important guide.

<!-- page:458 -->
Multiple sclerosis
439
Table 60.4    Summary of disease-modifying therapies with serious side effects highlighted.
Drug name
Mechanism of action
Mode of
delivery
Type of MS
Effectiveness
Side effects
Expected effect on
normal blood values
Alemtuzumab
(Lemtrada)
Monoclonal antibody against
CD52, causing rapid elimination
of CD52 immune cells in
circulation, ‘ordered’ repopulation
and thereby immune regulation.
Year 1, five
consecutive days
of infusions.
Year 2, three
consecutive days
of infusions.
RRMS
High
Infusion reactions (>90%), usually mild
but include acute coronary syndrome,
cerebrovascular events, and pulmonary
haemorrhage.
Secondary autoimmunity: thyroid (36%),
immune thrombocytopenia (1%),
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (1%),
and anti-GBM disease (0.3%).
Infections: upper respiratory tract
infections, urinary tract infections,
herpes, nocardia, listeria.
Low lymphocytes for few
months post infusion (varies
person to person).
Teriflunomide
Aubagio
Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase
inhibition inhibits de-novo
pyrimidine synthesis and
proliferation of activated
lymphocytes.
Once daily tablet
RRMS
Moderate
Headache
Nausea and diarrhoea
Hair thinning
Infections
Increased levels of liver enzymes
Beta-interferons
(including Avonex,
Extavia, Plegridy,
Rebif)
Immunomodulator – shift from
Th1 to Th2 response, reduce
pro-inflammatory cytokines,
reduce blood-brain barrier
extravasation.
Injection, ranging
from every other
day to once every
two weeks.
RRMS/active
SPMS
Moderate
Flu-like symptoms
Headache
Injection site reaction
Leukopenia
Liver toxicity, development of anti-IFN
antibodies
Cladribine
(Mavenclad)
Chlorinated analogue of the DNA
building block deoxyadenosine,
reduces both resting and dividing
CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells and B
cells.
Tablet, two
treatment courses
twelve months
apart
RRMS
High
Low lymphocytes for few
months post infusion (varies
person to person).
Fumaric acid esters
Dimethylfumerate
(Tecfidera) and
Diroximel fumarate
(Vumerity)
Possibly modulation of cytokine
expression, inhibition of immune
cell proliferation, Nrf2 activation,
lymphocyte apoptosis.
Twice daily tablet
RRMS
Moderate
Flushing
Nausea
Gastrointestinal upset
Decrease in lymphocytes
Rash
Increased levels of liver enzymes
Expected lower lymphocytes
than normal,
<0.8 × 109 increases risk of
PML. Discontinue if
<0.5 × 109 for more than
6 mo due to PML risk.
(continued )

<!-- page:459 -->
440
Acute Medicine
Drug name
Mechanism of action
Mode of
delivery
Type of MS
Effectiveness
Side effects
Expected effect on
normal blood values
Glatirimer acetate
(Copaxone and
Brabio)
Immunomodulating drug
comprising synthetic
polypeptides.
Injection daily or
three times a
week
RRMS
Moderate
Injection site reactions
Headache
Feeling sick
Lipoatrophy (indentations in the skin)
A sensation of impending doom/
palpitations, which occurs about
20–30 min after the injection and
self-resolves within 30 min.
Sphingosine-1phosphate (S1P)
receptor modulators
(fingolimod,
siponimod,
posenimod,
ozanimod)
Functional S1P modulator with
retention of lymphocytes in
lymphoid organs
Once daily tablet
RRMS/SPMS
(siponimod)
Moderate
Increased infections (URTIs, UTIs,
herpesvirus >>cryptococcal, PML)
Impaired vaccine response (reduced
T- and B-cell response to COVID-19).
Slightly increased risk of PML and basal
cell carcinoma
Macular oedema
Hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia,
raised LFTs
Cardiac conduction defects at first
dosage
Rebound syndrome (on discontinuation)
Expected lymphopenia
(concern if serially below
0.15 × 109 with infection,
<0.10 is problematic)
Natalizumab
(Tysabri)
Monoclonal antibody against
α4β1 integrin, inhibits immune
cells binding to endothelial cells
via vascular cell adhesion protein
(VCAM).
4–6 weekly
infusion
RRMS
High
Increased risk of infection.
Infusion reaction
Development of antibodies
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
Ofatunumab
(Kesimpta)
Anti-CD20, causing depletion of
immature and mature B cells.
Early precursors of B cells, mature
plasma cells are not eliminated
Monthly injection
RRMS
High
Injection-associated reactions
Chest/gastro/viral infections
Herpes infection (cold sore or shingles)
Reduced response to vaccines
Decreased immature and
mature B cells
Ocreclizumab
(Ocrevus)
Anti-CD20, causing depletion of
immature and mature B cells.
Early precursors of B cells, mature
plasma cells are not eliminated.
Six monthly
infusion
RRMS/PPMS
High
Infusion-associated reactions
Chest/
gastro/viral infections
Herpes infection (cold sore or shingles)
Reduced response to vaccines.
Decreased immature and
mature B cells.
Table 60.4    (Continued )

<!-- page:460 -->
Multiple sclerosis
441
Similarly, a change in bowel habits should be investigated as it would for any patient without MS. When one
considers treatments in patients who are potentially older than the original trial populations with ageing
immune systems – those on disease-modifying therapies may present with challenging side effects not least
propensity to infection. Older patients on dimethylfumerate (Tecfidera) are at greater risk of developing lymphopenia putting this population at greater risk of PML.
Discharge planning
When encountering patients on the medical take, it isn’t always primarily their MS that is the cause of their
presentation – it may be related to side effects of their disease-modifying therapy or something entirely separate, such as infection or other medical problems entirely unrelated to their MS. Patients with MS relapses/
diagnosis on admission should be discussed with the neurology registrar on-call and treated as per NICE guidelines if steroids are required. They can be referred as an outpatient to the MS clinic for diagnostic review and
treatment consideration or to the relapse clinic to discern the presence of ‘fresh’ inflammation that may require
treatment escalation. Escalation of disease-modifying therapy is rarely an emergency and the usual therapy
assessments apply to ensure the patient is ready for discharge. In patients with complex symptom management again, this can be discussed with the neurology registrar on-call or the MS Nurses who can expedite
specialist multidisciplinary team input as required.
Further reading
Galea I, Ward-Abel N, Heesen C. (2015 Apr). Relapse in multiple sclerosis. Bmj. 14, 350.
Graves JS, Krysko KM, Hua LH, et al. (2023) Ageing and multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurol 22(1), 66–77.
McGinley MP, Goldschmidt CH, Rae-Grant AD. (2021) Diagnosis and treatment of multiple sclerosis: a review.
JAMA 325(8), 765–779.
Miller DH, Chard DT, Ciccarelli O. (2012 Feb 1) Clinically isolated syndromes. The Lancet Neurology. 11(2),
157–169.
MS Society MS Society UK|information, research and support|MS Society. Last updated: 2 April 2024. https://
www.mssociety.org.uk/.
MS Trust MS decisions aid|MS Trust. Last updated: 2 April 2024. https://mstrust.org.uk/information-support/
ms-drugs-treatments/ms-decisions-aid.
NICE. (2022) Multiple Sclerosis in Adults: Management.
Thompson AJ, Banwell BL, Barkhof F, et al. (2018) Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: 2017 revisions of the
McDonald criteria. Lancet Neurol 17(2), 162–173.
•	 There are some typical neurological symptoms and/or signs that can suggest a first presentation
in MS.
•	 In patients with known MS who present to hospital with neurological symptoms, it is necessary to
distinguish relapse from pseudorelapse by exploring and addressing relevant triggers.
•	 Patients with progressive MS may present with complications of bladder disturbance and immobility.
•	 With the advent of disease-modifying therapy, patients may present with complications of treatment,
especially infections.
Box 60.5  Key points for physicians on take.
