# CHAPTER 61 Myasthenia gravis

- Pages: 461-464
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:461 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 61
442
Introduction
Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is an antibody-mediated disorder of the neuromuscular junction characterised by
fatigable muscle weakness. This condition impacts the ocular, bulbar, axial, limb, and respiratory muscles. The
hallmark of MG is the variability of symptoms, which classically worsen with muscle use and improve with rest.
Such variability may confound clinical assessment resulting in misdiagnosis as a functional disorder.
In the majority of cases (approximately 85%), MG is associated with antibodies targeting the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (AChR). Other patients may have antibodies against Muscle-Specific Kinase (MuSK) or
Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein 4 (LRP4), while a small number are seronegative (an entity
that should be approached very carefully given the high risk of misdiagnosis). The presence of these antibodies
can help guide diagnosis but are not directly used to guide treatment decisions. False positives can occur, and
the detection of autoantibodies should always be assessed with clinical and electrophysiologic features to
support a diagnosis of MG.
Clinical subtypes
MG can be grouped into various clinical subtypes, with ocular versus generalized involvement, early- versus
late-onset groups, and by antibody status. Cases in the late-onset (>50 years) group are rising, and MG should
be considered even in the elderly (>80 years). Thymic abnormalities, such as thymoma (seen in 15% of cases,
with a peak at 50 years) and thymic hyperplasia, necessitate screening with CT thorax in all patients. Of note,
thymoma is not associated with anti-MuSK antibodies.
Presenting features
Patients with symptoms due to new onset MG may present to acute hospital services. Ocular symptoms are
the most common initial symptoms seen in up to 60% of patients. Patients may experience ptosis (drooping
of one or both eyelids) and binocular diplopia, which tend to worsen with sustained gaze in a single direction
or as the day progresses. Some degree of asymmetry can be expected. Notably, the pupils are unaffected in
MG, unlike classical Horner syndrome or compressive oculomotor palsies.
Beyond ocular symptoms, MG may affect bulbar muscles, leading to dysarthria and dysphagia. Patients may
exhibit fatigable speech difficulty with a nasal quality, and report nasal regurgitation of fluids due to palatal
Myasthenia gravis
Samuel W. Mackrill, Bernard Liem, and M. Isabel Leite
CHAPTER 61

<!-- page:462 -->
Myasthenia gravis
443
muscle weakness, difficulty moving food in the mouth due to tongue weakness, and fatigue when chewing
indicative of jaw muscle involvement. Facial weakness may manifest as difficulty smiling, and in some cases
patients may report facial motor weakness as a “numbness” around the mouth, such that MG is not initially
considered. Axial weakness of neck flexion (more so than neck extension), and proximal limb weakness may
also occur. Distal weakness, although less common, is seen in some cases. In the acute setting, severe isolated
respiratory or bulbar presentations may require emergency admission to hospital and sometimes intensive care.
In such cases, the underlying neurological disease may not be immediately apparent without a careful history
and neurological examination.
Diagnosis
Antibody testing (with radioimmunoprecipitation assays, and/or more accurate cell-based assays) is now the
mainstay of the diagnostic work up, supported by clinical neurophysiology including repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) and single-fibre electromyography (sfEMG). CT thorax should be performed to look for thymic
abnormalities in all patients. The edrophonium (Tensilon) is no longer recommended.
Management
The primary aim in managing MG is achieving symptom freedom with minimal side effects of therapy.
Symptomatic therapy begins with pyridostigmine, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEi), started at 30 mg
three times daily. Any benefit is rapid and can then be up-titrated accordingly (typical doses 60 mg three to four
times daily). Cholinergic side effects such as diarrhoea, abdominal cramping and increased secretions can be
mitigated with mebeverine or glycopyrrolate. However, the effectiveness of AChEis is variable an insufficient,
with most cases requiring some degree of immunosuppression.
Long-term management centres on corticosteroids and steroid-sparing agents like azathioprine, methotrexate, mycophenolate, and increasingly rituximab and complement factor inhibitors. Corticosteroids should be
up-titrated gradually. Azathioprine is a good choice in women of childbearing age. These therapies can take
several months to work, so are not effective acutely where intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or plasma
exchange (PLEX) are preferred. Minimally-invasive VATS (video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery) thymectomy
should be considered in all patients with thymoma-associated MG and all patients up to 60 years in the
absence of a surgical contraindications, and allow significant reduction of immunosuppression, and sometimes
a sustained remission.
Acute decompensations and myasthenic crisis
Worsening of myasthenic symptoms is a common reason for patients with known MG to present to hospital
acutely, and is more commonly encountered than new-onset MG. Worsening may occur for a number of reasons, including spontaneous fluctuations in disease activity, non-compliance with treatment, weaning of immunosuppression, intercurrent illness, medication interactions (see Box 61.1), pregnancy or post-operatively. Severe
exacerbations characterised by acute respiratory insufficiency requiring either non-invasive ventilatory support
or intubation are labelled myasthenic crisis. The lifetime risk of crisis is 10–20%, with an annual risk of 2–3%.
Crises may occur due to worsening of the myasthenia itself or aspiration in patients with bulbar weakness.
Early recognition of impending respiratory failure due to myasthenic crisis improves management and
helps avoid complications. Patients may be unable to complete full sentences and may describe a feeling of

<!-- page:463 -->
444
Acute Medicine
suffocation that worsens when lying flat (thought to be due to the facilitatory effect of gravity on the
diaphragm when sat upright). Tachypnoea and a weak cough may be evident, associated with difficulty
clearing secretions and risk of mucus plugging. In the elderly, confusion and agitation may signify impending
respiratory failure.
Regular clinical reassessment and serial forced vital capacity (FVC) monitoring, at least 2 hourly at first, is
advised as deterioration may be rapid. A handheld FVC device should be made available on all acute medical
units. Patients should sit upright, inspire fully and blow steadily (not rapidly) for the duration of a full forced
exhalation. A volume, typically measured in litres, is produced. In some cases, facial weakness may affect the
ability to form a tight seal around the device mouthpiece, resulting in a falsely low reading – a mask can be
used to mitigate this. Other measures including counting numbers in one breath, oxygen saturation
(SaO2), peak expiratory flow rate, and blood gas monitoring are insensitive and should not be relied upon.
In particular, SaO2 and blood gasses remain normal until respiratory failure is severe, providing false reassurance. Where swallow and aspiration are a concern, patients should be made nil-by-mouth pending a formal
assessment.
An FVC threshold of 25–30 mL/kg ideal body weight is typically used for admission to intensive care and
consideration of elective intubation (especially at <20 mL/kg), however the trend of serial measurements is of
importance in understanding an individual patient’s trajectory. MDT discussion, involving neurology, medicine
and intensive care is advised. In patients who may not be candidates for intubation or in those with a less
fulminant course, non-invasive ventilation can be considered.
In addition to ventilatory support, treatment with IVIg or PLEX alongside high dose corticosteroids (typically
40–60 mg prednisolone once daily) is usually indicated. Steroids alone do not act rapidly enough and are
thought to drive a paradoxical worsening of motor weakness when started acutely at a high dose – an effect
that is mitigated by ventilation and IVIg/PLEX. There is no appreciable difference in outcomes between the two
acute treatments, although IVIg is safer in those with active infection, and PLEX may act more rapidly (and is
favoured in anti-MuSK patients). IVIg is given at a dose of 2 g/kg ideal body weight spread over two to five
days, with five days courses preferred if there is risk of fluid overload or VTE.
Chronic immunosuppressive therapies may be paused in the setting of acute infection, but otherwise can be
continued until neurology review. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors can be continued, but may worsen bronchorrhea and secretion burden, so dose reductions are often considered on this basis.
Aminoglycosides (gentamicin, streptomycin)
Quinolones (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, ofloxacin)
Tetracyclines (doxycycline, lymecycline, minocycline)
Macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin, use of telithromycin has resulted in deaths)
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
Magnesium, in particular if given intravenously
Lithium
Phenytoin
Various antipsychotics
Caution with beta-blockers, procainamide, quinidine
Possibly calcium channel blockers, gabapentin, pregabalin.
A complete list can be found on the Myaware website (www.myaware.org). In the event of
a severe or life-threatening indication, the above medications can be considered with close
monitoring and following discussion with neurology.
Box 61.1  Medications associated with exacerbated myasthenic symptoms.

<!-- page:464 -->
Myasthenia gravis
445
Finally, it is important to remember that not all acute neurological deteriorations in myasthenia patients are
due to myasthenia. A wider differential diagnosis including stroke, tumours or bleeding should be considered,
all of which can mimic worsening MG.
Prognosis
Prognosis varies widely, though those with frequent exacerbations/crises, severe bulbar symptoms, onset in
older age, or thymoma-associated, appear to have a worse outcome. Inpatient mortality following acute myasthenic crisis approaches 10%.
Further reading
Gilhus and Verschuuren. (2015) Myasthenia gravis: subgroup classification and therapeutic strategies. Lancet
Neurol 14(10), 1023–1036.
