# CHAPTER 62 Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders

- Pages: 465-470
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:465 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHAPTER 62
446
The most common movement and neurodegenerative disorder is Parkinson’s disease (PD), affecting around
0.3% of people older than 40 years worldwide. PD diagnosis is based on clinical examination, as no final diagnostic radiologic, blood or physiologic test has yet been developed. The mean age of diagnosis is 70.5 years.
PD is characterised by features of parkinsonism: bradykinesia, rigidity, resting tremor and postural instability. It
is the only parkinsonism with a good and sustained response to antiparkinsonian drugs.
Priorities
Medical emergencies for patients with PD may be related to the disease itself, to the medication used for its
treatment, or to another unrelated problem.
•	 If a previously stable PD patient presents with new symptoms or acute deterioration, a thorough history is
needed, particularly the detailed drug history of any recent changes to the PD regime – increased, reduced,
stopped or newly started drugs, with a work-up for metabolic or infectious disorders.
•	 Any elevation of body temperature in patients on antiparkinsonian drugs should raise suspicion of
parkinsonism hyperpyrexia syndrome (PHS).
•	 If the history reveals previous diagnosis and treatment of a poorly levodopa-responsive parkinsonism,
diagnosis of atypical parkinsonism is indicated.
•	 If a patient with parkinsonism is admitted to hospital, the admitting clinician should document immediately
that dopamine antagonists are contraindicated (see drug-induced parkinsonism list below).
•	 If a patient with parkinsonism is admitted to hospital, the patient’s individualized antiparkinsonian drug
regime should continue in order to avoid serious complications.
•	 If swallowing tablets is difficult, crush normal-release L-dopa and dissolve in water prior to administration,
or switch to equivalent dose of orodispersible L-dopa. In this situation, amantadine, COMT inhibitors
(entacapone, tolcapone and opicapone) and MAO-B inhibitors (selegiline, rasagiline, safinamide) can be
safely omitted. In case of combination L-dopa/entacapone tablets, switch only the equivalent dose of L-dopa
to orodispersible form, and omit entacapone. Return to usual medication routine as soon as clinically
possible.
•	 In patients who are nil-by-mouth (NBM) and for whom the enteral route is possible, a nasogastric tube (NGT)
should be placed as soon as possible for administering PD medications. If the enteral route is not possible,
commence rotigotine patch (see Tables 62.1 and 62.2).
Parkinson’s disease and other
movement disorders
Sanja Thompson
CHAPTER 62

<!-- page:466 -->
Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders
447
•	 If a PD patient is admitted with hyperactivity and dyskinesia, but deliberately increases their own dopaminergic drug regime, a disorder of ‘dopamine dysregulation syndrome’ should be considered, resembling
substance abuse pattern.
•	 Dopaminergic medications may cause impulse-control disorders such as compulsive buying or eating,
hypersexuality, compulsive sexual behaviour and risk-seeking driving behaviour.
•	 Acute akinesia is the sudden onset of an akinetic state that is poorly responsive to treatment with antiparkinsonian medications and is a potentially fatal emergency condition that may last several days and requires
hospitalization.
Further management
Attendance at emergency department (ED) by PD patients
Remember that only around 15% of PD patient admissions are related to motor symptoms.
The most common reason for PD patients to attend ED is infectious disease (21–32%) and falls. Looking for
dysphagia in these patients is obligatory, as swallowing difficulty is highly prevalent particularly in advanced PD,
thus increasing the risk of aspiration pneumonia. The other most common causes include cardiovascular/
cerebrovascular (12–26%), gastrointestinal (8–11%) and metabolic (2–6%). Treatment of any of these conditions
follows the usual guidelines.
Emergency attendance for PD-related issues are most commonly related to falls and trauma (13–27%). The
most commonly implicated reasons are postural instability, freezing of gait and motor fluctuations/dyskinesia.
In addition to examination, the usual investigations and assessments of patients presenting with falls, such as
Table 62.1  Conversion of oral dopamine agonists to rotigotine patch.
Pramipexole MR mg/day
(expressed as base)
Pramipexole IR mg/dose –
usually TDS dosing
(expressed as base)
Ropinirole mg/day
immediate release
Ropinirole
MR mg/day
Rotigotine
patch mg/24 h
0.26
0.088
Less 3 mg
  2
  2
0.52
0.18
3(1 md TDS)
  4
  4
1.05
0.35
6(2mg TDS)
  6
  6
1.57
0.53
9(3mg TDS)
  8
  8
2.1
0.7
12(4mg TDS)
12
10-12
2.62
0.88
18(6mg TDS)
16
14
3.15
1.05
24(8mg TDS)
24
16 (max)
Table 62.2  Conversion of oral levodopa preparations to rotigotine patch.
Current levodopa regime (mg/day)
Rotigotine patch equivalent/mg/24 h
  50
  1
100
  2
150
  4
200
  4
300
  6
400
  8
600
12
800
16

<!-- page:467 -->
448
Acute Medicine
medication review or footwear review, it is important to look for significant postural hypotension (>20 mmHg).
If postural hypotension is found, consider midodrine 2.5–10 mg up to 3 times daily and recommend an
abdominal binder.
A specific problem to look for in patients presenting with falls is the presence of ‘off periods’, which are
characterized by the re-emergence of poor mobility/parkinsonian symptoms at the end of the dose interval, i.e.
usually 3–4 h after the last antiparkinsonian drug was taken. For such patients, seek advice from a movement
disorder specialist.
If there is a history of multiple falls and worsening neurological symptoms, exclude subdural hematoma.
Common emergency psychiatric conditions in PD patients
Around 8% of PD patients present urgently with psychiatric conditions including delirium. As in other patients,
investigations and treatment in PD patients includes multi-component interventions, e.g. looking for the
cause, including recent introduction of a new drug, onset of new constipation or infection and treat these
accordingly. If pharmacological treatment of delirium is needed (e.g. risk of injury to the patient or to others),
quetiapine should be started (12.5 mg twice daily) and gradually increased if needed, to not more than
150 mg/day. With the improvement of delirium, prescription of quetiapine should be changed from regular to
PRN, with the aim to discontinue when appropriate.
Psychosis in PD patients usually present with predominantly visual hallucinations and paranoid delusions. It
could be triggered for example by infection. Apart from treating the underlying problem, the use of atypical
antipsychotics may be indicated; quetiapine is recommended, starting with 12.5 mg twice daily. The use of
clozapine, starting dose 6.25 mg a day, is better studied, but there is a risk of agranulocytosis.
Depression is one of the most common psychiatric conditions in PD. Therefore, patients should be assessed
for suicidal ideation. Seek psychiatric help if indicated, and consider SSRI and cognitive behavioural therapy.
L-dopa-induced dyskinesia
LID may trigger emergency admission, if a patient presents with large-amplitude, abnormal involuntary
movements. These are caused by L-dopa, but other drugs that enhance the effect of dopamine, for example
dopamine agonists (DAs), may worsen it. In severe cases, it can cause rhabdomyolysis. Also, the respiratory
muscles of some patients with LID may be affected, thus presenting with involuntary grunting, chest wall
discomfort, dyspnoea and tachypnoea. The treatment is gradual reduction of L-dopa or removal of other
dopaminergic drugs, like DAs. Refer to a movement disorder specialist for immediate advice.
Acute akinesia
Acute akinesia may last for several days and the patient may need hospitalization for supportive treatment.
It can be provoked by for example bone fracture, medication changes, including starting antipsychotic drugs
or errors in L-dopa administration. Refer to a movement disorder specialist for immediate advice.
Parkinsonism Hyperpyrexia Syndrome
A rare complication in PD patients is PHS, also known as neuroleptic malignant-like syndrome (NMLS), and is
potentially fatal in around 4%. It occurs after sudden reduction/cessation of antiparkinsonian medications
or sudden stoppage of deep brain stimulation (DBS). Symptoms are muscle rigidity, acute PD deterioration,
agitation, sweating, tachycardia, fever and autonomic dysfunction such as uncontrollable hypertension. It
resembles the clinical picture of neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), although NMS is triggered by neuroleptic use. Treatment for PHS includes admission to intensive care, respiratory support, cooling down via ce
packs, administration of antipyretics and cooled IV fluids, and the insertion of nasogastric tube (NGT) for
additional doses of L-dopa. Treatment for NMS is discontinuation of antipsychotics. Refer to a movement
disorder specialist for immediate advice.

<!-- page:468 -->
Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders
449
The syndrome of dopamine dysregulation
For PD patients presenting with a freely chosen, self-elected increase of dopaminergic drugs and new onset
hyperactivity, violent or repetitive behaviour, even dyskinesia, consider the syndrome of dopamine dysregulation (or levodopa misuse). It may be associated with hypomania or psychosis. The treatment is gradual reduction
of dopaminergic drug doses and treatment of psychiatric complications. Refer to a movement disorder specialist
for immediate advice.
Impulse control and related behavioural disorders
Impulse control and related behavioural disorders (ICBDs) may manifest with symptoms like compulsive cleaning, compulsive eating, compulsive spending or pathological eating and is associated more commonly with the
use of DAs, younger age, male sex and depression. Treatment is the gradual discontinuation of DA therapy,
with consideration given to quetiapine or SSRI. Refer to a movement disorder specialist for immediate advice.
Serotonin syndrome (SS) in PD patients
New onset tremor, muscle rigidity, confusion, agitation, myoclonus, autonomic instability with hyperthermia,
hypertension, hypotension, leucocytosis and elevated creatine kinase (CK) in PD patients should be considered
to be due to SS, particularly if the patients are taking the monoamine oxidase type B (MAO B) inhibitors
(e.g. selegiline, rasagiline) with antidepressant with serotoninergic properties, such as SSRIs, SNRIs due to drugdrug interaction.
Emergency complications of device-assisted therapies
There are three device-assisted therapies for management of medically refractory motor complications: DBS
(deep brain stimulation), continuous levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG), and continuous subcutaneous
infusion (CSAI). All three therapies entail possible complications:
•	 DBS-related complications include infection, intracerebral haemorrhage, confusion, seizures, cerebrospinal
fluid leak, the malfunction of implantable pulse generator, the fracture/migration of the wire, allergic
reaction to the hardware.
•	 LCIG is delivered through a percutaneous gastrojejunostomy tube by battery-powered pump.
Complications include blockage or displacement of the J-tube, abdominal pain, skin infection, peritonitis,
pneumoperitoneum.
•	 CSAI complications include haemolytic anaemia, hypereosinophilia syndrome, confusion, severe postural
hypotension and skin nodules at injection sites, which may undergo necrotic ulceration or cause eosinophilic
panniculitis.
Emergency swallowing difficulty in PD patients
With any PD patient admitted to hospital, it is important to start the antiparkinsonian drug regime as soon as
possible, considering that administration of antiparkinsonian drugs should be restored in less <24 h. If the
patient suffers with dysphagia, but can still swallow liquid, their immediate-release L-dopa tablets can be
crushed, dissolved in water and given orally or via NGT, or the orodispersible form of L-dopa could be given
instead. The total doses over 24 h should be divided and administered equally throughout the waking day.
Modified-release L-dopa tablets cannot be crushed, so calculate their total daily dose and administer as either
crushed immediate-release tablets or as orodispersable tablets. A daily L-dopa dose reduction of about 30%
may be required when converting from modified-release preparation to immediate release, along with more
frequent administration.

<!-- page:469 -->
450
Acute Medicine
If the patient is taking both immediate- and modified-release L-dopa, calculate the combined total daily dose
and divide it equally throughout the waking day.
Immediate-release DA (pramipexole/ropinirole) can be crushed and dispersed in water for oral or via NGT
administration, while modified-release DA should be switched to immediate-release equivalent and given in
three divided doses via NGT (e.g. 24 mg MR ropinirole = 8 mg immediate-release ropinirole TDS) after being
crushed and dispersed in water.
If any medication is given through NGT, flush the tube well to ensure complete administration and to prevent blockages.
If it is not possible to use NGT, e.g. due to gastro-intestinal system failure, convert each separate preparation
of L-dopa or DA to equivalent rotigotine patch strength. NB: 100 mg levodopa is approximately equivalent to
2 mg/24 h rotigotine patch. If the total equivalent dose exceeds 16 mg (max dose of rotigotine), use it and
contact a PD specialist immediately for further advice.
Rotigotine patch come in various strengths, and more than one patch may be used, but patches should
not be cut. Rotigotine patch should be used with caution in patients with pre-existing dementia or if they
suffer with delirium. Such patients may require dose reduction with a maximum recommended daily dose
of 12 mg.
Remember that apart from PD, patients may have other forms of parkinsonism that usually mimic PD in the
early phase, but respond poorly to L-dopa . If any such patient is on antiparkinsonian medications, approach
the treatment of any complications or side effects in the way described above for PD patients. L-dopa in such
patients should not be stopped suddenly, but if it contributes to the clinical problem (e.g. confusion, postural
hypotension), it should be considered for tapering off gradually under the supervision of a movement disorder
specialist.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA): parkinsonism + autonomic failure (e.g. orthostatic hypotension, urinary
symptoms), and cerebellar signs. MSA has faster disease progression than PD. These patients could be taking
900 or 1000 mg of L-dopa (a recommended dose before it is declared a failed treatment). A complication that
these patients sometimes present with is related to injurious actions to themselves and/or a bed partner due
to  rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder. If the behaviour is dangerous and repetitive, treatment
includes changing the sleep environment and a trial of melatonin 3–18 mg, or clonazepam (to start from
0.25 mg at night). Some MSA patients may present with nocturnal laryngeal stridor, for which nocturnal positive pressure ventilation may be considered. However, there is an unpreventable risk of sudden death from
disordered central respiration, suffocation by sputum and cardiac autonomic disturbance in some of these
patients.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): parkinsonism + dementia with visual hallucinations, fluctuating cognition, delusions, and REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD).
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD): parkinsonism + dystonia, focal myoclonus, alien limb phenomenon.
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP): parkinsonism + supranuclear vertical ophthalmoparesis, early onset
of falls, urinary incontinence and in the majority of patients progressive cognitive impairment.
In secondary parkinsonism, the aetiology is known and treated accordingly:
•	 Drug-induced: Dopamine antagonists (antiemetics – metoclopramide and prochlorperazine; neuroleptics –
haloperidol, risperidone and olanzapine). The diagnostic clue could be the presence of orofacial dyskinesia
or other tardive movements. All patients presenting with parkinsonism must have current and past medication reviews, as parkinsonism may take up to a year to resolve after stopping the offending drug.
•	 Neurogenetic disorders: in younger patients presenting with parkinsonism, consider Wilson disease due
to copper accumulation in the brain. However, there are reports of cases diagnosed in older age.
•	 Infectious or autoimmune encephalitis: Coxsackie virus, HIV, West Nile virus.
•	 Toxic exposure: cyanide, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), manganese and some
organic solvents.
•	 Structural or traumatic: brain tumours, trauma and cerebrovascular disease.

<!-- page:470 -->
Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders
451
Further reading
Brennan KA, Genever RW. (2010) Managing Parkinson’s disease during surgery. Br Med J 341, c5718.
Cosentino G, Avenali M, Schindler A, et al. (2021) A multinational consensus on dysphagia in Parkinson’s
disease: screening, diagnosis and prognostic value. J Neurol. 2022 269(3), 1335.
Peball M, Krismer F, Knaus HG, et al. (2020) Non-motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease are reduced by
nabilone. Ann Neurol 88, 712.
Rizzo G, Copetti M, Arcuti S, et al. (2016) Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Neurology 86, 566.
Seppi K, Ray Chaudhuri K, Coelho M, et al. (2019) Update on treatments for nonmotor symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease-an evidence-based medicine review. Mov Disord 34, 180.
Stankovic I, Fanciulli A, Sidoroff V, Wenning GK. (2023) A review on the clinical diagnosis of multiple system
atrophy. Cerebellum 22(5), 825–839. doi: 10.1007/s12311-022-01453-w.
