# CHAPTER 68 Comprehensive geriatric assessment

- Pages: 500-506
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:500 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
481
The Rockwood clinical frailty scale (CFS) has been adopted by most due to its simplicity. It is important
to score at patient baseline (2 weeks prior to admission).
The score runs 1–9 with the higher score indicating the frailest phenotype.
Comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) is the specialist intervention provided by geriatricians and those
who specialise in care of the older adult. CGA delivers a multidisciplinary (MDT), multidimensional assessment
of any older adult deemed to benefit from it.
CGA is time and person intensive and not synergistic with the ethos of the acute floor. Frail patients are likely
to come to harm in the acute care environment. An MDT-led CGA must be targeted to the ‘frailest frail’ to
deliver maximum impact.
Numbers needed to treat (NNT) to prevent admission into 24-h care and progressive frailty from CGA is 20.
Compare this to the NNT for most medical interventions and the benefit is clear.
The CGA domains lead to a stratified problem list that can be addressed in order of urgency to modify
and delay the frailty syndromes. These actions can be completed within primary or secondary care. Various
models of service have been used to provide geriatrician input at the front door: dedicated units, in reach
liaison services: this will vary according to local resources but regardless of the model, a specialist MDT
delivering CGA is key.
The 2021 UK census demonstrated that the number of centenarians living in England and Wales has
increased by 24.5% since 2011. The older demographic is increasing faster than the number of geriatricians and those practicing on the acute floor must have competencies and confidence in managing the frail
older adult.
Not all older adults are frail. It is important to consistently identify the frailest to target disease-modifying
specialist intervention.
A CFS > 6 (the need for care prior to admission: care package or placement) is when hospital-related harm
increases exponentially (increased lengths of stay, readmission rates and mortality).
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
Ojaswini Pathak
CHAPTER 68

<!-- page:501 -->
482
Acute Medicine
The frailty phenotype is a medical term but has negative stigma with patients and carers. Care providers
favour terms like ‘care of the older adult’ or positive acronyms like ‘FIT, RACE, OPAL’ when branding their
service for the patient facing population. Whatever the name: service-delivery remains via an MDT-driven CGA
for our frailest populations.
CGA can be initiated by any member of the MDT. Your local MDT may vary as per resource but may include
physio and occupational therapists, links to social workers, specialist nurses, advanced care practitioners, pharmacists and liaison mental health colleagues.
CGA on acute care wards and in the community have different priorities. Community CGA may focus on
chronic cognitive impairment, mood disorder, nutrition, weight loss, falls prevention and advance care planning over a period of months. This chapter focuses on CGA on the acute floor.
Consider CGA MDT when CFS > 6 (prior care needs) AND
F
Falls
R
Reduced mobility
A
Acute confusion (delirium)
I
Incontinence (recurrent UTI/ constipation/urinary retention)
L
Lots of medications (polypharmacy: number of medication and susceptibility to side effects)
NOT requiring a speciality team (e.g. MI, stroke haemorrhage)
Surgical or trauma issues should be triaged by the emergency department and addressed prior to referral to the
acute medical take.
Medical
It is important to complete a thorough medical clerking with a collateral history.
Any acute illness can cause deconditioning in the frail adult.
Older physiology is not represented in medical textbooks: do not be misled by normal bloods; use clinical
examination, bedside tests (ECG, bladder scan and postural BP readings) and simple imaging (chest radiograph) to consider atypical presentations which are common with increasing frailty.
The acute frailty syndromes conveniently spell the word itself to serve as an aide memoire and
are  common presentations to the acute take. Patients presenting with a CFS > 6 and an acute
frailty  syndrome with no requirement for specialist intervention should be highlighted to your
local CGA MDT.
CGA is not a ‘one stop’ assessment but a dynamic, ‘living’ assessment that reflects the evolving patient
journey. Acute floor CGA should focus on urgent medical issues and risk stratify other issues to be
addressed by the most appropriate primary or secondary care teams post discharge.
Succinct discharge documentation including CFS, cognitive screening, and onward recommendations is essential. It may be the only handover document at the secondary/ primary care interface.
Aim to communicate- what was found – what was done and what needs doing.

<!-- page:502 -->
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
483
Falls
Falls:
coming to rest on the ground
Syncopal
Cardiac
Orthostatic
Hypotension
Drop of:
20mmHg Systolic: volume state
10mmHg Diastolic: autonomic
OR
Standing BP <90 mmHg
Pulse reaction
AND
Symptom reproduction
Seizure or
Metabolic
Collateral
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
Non syncopal
Multifactorial
Medical
Environment
Postural blood pressure readings are rarely performed accurately on the acute floor. If a drop is recognised it
is important to note heart rate variability and if index symptoms are reproduced.
The systolic drop suggests hypovolaemia (consider a fluid challenge and repeat: beware the iatrogenic hypovolaemia from prolonged waits for assessment). Consider stopping antihypertensive medications prior to the
initiation of fludrocortisone (which has a poor evidence base).
The diastolic drop suggests autonomic dysfunction (diabetes, MS, Parkinson’s and alcohol) and is harder to
manage but may respond better to alpha agents like midodrine.
Normal physiological response to standing is an increased heart rate. If this does not happen it may indicate
autonomic dysfunction, bradyarrhythmia or tight rate control.
Non-syncopal
Likely to be multifactorial due to cognition, impaired sensorium (hearing or visual impairment), acute infection,
polypharmacy or environmental (loose carpet or ill-fitting slipper).
Injury sustained during a fall should be assessed by your triaging trauma/ED colleagues. ‘Silver’ trauma is a
specialist area.
A new fracture should prompt a review of bone health. If you do not have an established fracture
liaison service locally: this can be done with the FRAX NOGG tool and recommendations forwarded to
primary care.
Differential: cardiac disease or arrhythmia, seizure activity, metabolic (hypoglycaemia)

<!-- page:503 -->
484
Acute Medicine
Reduced mobility (e.g. unable to get out of bed)
Frailty reflects a reduced resilience to stressors like illness and may present as a fall or reduced mobility. Look
for the underlying acute illness, if not present this may reflect care strain (inadequate support in community to
meet current care needs) and prompt OT review.
Acute confusion
Delirium may be superimposed on dementia or present on its own. It can affect 30% of hospitalised patients. It is
important to consider metabolic, infectious and medication causes. Delirium can take up to 6 months to settle. Most
hospitals have delirium care bundles and pathways to guide management and acronyms to help work through
potential triggers, e.g. PINCH ME (pain, infection, nutrition, constipation, hydration, medication and environment).
4AT is used to screen for delirium with the 6CIT for chronic/mild cognitive impairment.
Collateral history will clarify chronicity.
Cognitive Screening
Diagnosis of Dementia? Yes / No Memory affected in the last 12 months? Yes / No Mood disturbances? Yes / No
Confusion Screen Results:
4AT Assessment Test for Delirium & Cognitive Impairment
ALERTNESS attempt to wake with speech or gentle
touch on shoulder.
AMT4 Age, date of birth, place (name of hospital or
building), current year.
No mistakes (0) One mistake (1) Two or more mistakes (2)
ATTENTION "Please tell me the months of the year
in backwards order starting at December."
More than seven (0) Scores less than seven or refuses (1)
Untestable or refuses to start (2)
ACUTE CHANGE OR FLUCTUATING Over the last
2 weeks and still evident in the last 24hrs.
4 or above: possible delirium +/- cognitive impairment
1-3: possible cognitive impairment
0: delirium or severe cognitive impairment unlikely
Score
Six-item Cognitive Impairment Test (6CIT)
Question
Score Range
What year is it?
Correct: 0 points
Incorrect: 4 points
Correct: 0 points
Incorrect: 3 points
What month is it?
Give memory
phrase
John/Smith/42/
West Street / Bedford
Correct: 0 points
Incorrect: 3 points
What time is it?
Correct: 0 points
One error: 2 points
Over one error: 4 points
Count back from
20–1
Say the months in
reverse
Correct: 0 points
Incorrect: 4 points
Repeat the memory
phrase
0–7 Normal
8–9 Mild cognitive impairment
10–28 Signiﬁcant cognitive impairment
Score
Correct: 0 points
2 points per error (Max 10)
Score
Normal (0) Mild sleepiness (0) Clearly abnormal (4)
No (0) Yes (4)
1
2
3
4
Differential: vestibular or cerebellar syndromes.
Limb/musculoskeletal injury with pain affecting mobility (atraumatic? think gout, haemarthroses,
bursitis)
Peripheral oedema: heavy legs are hard to move (think dependent oedema, medication related or
heart failure?)

<!-- page:504 -->
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
485
CT brain imaging can be overutilized in the confused patient, but it is an important investigation to consider
if bedside tests, bloods and plain radiographs are inconclusive.
Any cognitive impairment identified during acute admission should be highlighted to primary care to monitor or refer to memory services.
Incontinence
Urinary incontinence may result from intercurrent urinary tract infections. Urine dipsticks are likely to be positive in the care home and catheterised population, so it is important to make this diagnosis with enough corroborating evidence from blood work, symptomology and microscopy results.
Urinary tract infections are over-diagnosed and is important to consider mimics: urinary retention or diuresis.
Recurrent UTIs are not normal and onward urological investigation should be considered to identify the underlying cause.
Faecal incontinence can be due to overflow diarrhoea (constipation) or common prescriptions (metformin,
nutritional and mineral supplements and antibiotics). Once addressed, consider red flag symptoms that warrant onward bowel investigation.
General incontinence may be functional (i.e. the person is not mobile enough to get to the toilet) and be a
result of the environment or clothing. Occupational therapy input will address this.
Lots of medications (polypharmacy)
The multimorbidity and significant polypharmacy seen with increasing age, brings with it an increased risk of
adverse drug reactions which is implicated in 6% of emergency hospital admissions.
Physiology changes with age, affecting drug pharmacokinetics and excretion. The accumulation of drugs and
side effects can trigger an acute frailty syndrome. This opportunity for medication review should not be missed.
Polypharmacy not only implicates the number of medications but also the increasing susceptibility to adverse
side effects.
Many drugs have anti-cholinergic properties with an accumulative effect. These can cause falls, cognitive
impairment, constipation and urinary retention (acute frailty syndromes) and deprescribing should be
considered.
Online tools (STOPP START) and calculators (ACBcalc.com) are available to aid in deprescribing decisions
with patient and carer discussion.
Deprescribing saves money from the fewer medications dispensed and from the prevention of adverse
drug reactions. The cost implication is underestimated but patient experience, journey and outcome are
improved.
Differential: Stroke (do not mistake dysphasia with confusion), post ictal states (these can last longer in
older adults), encephalitis (infective or autoimmune), hypercalcaemia, hypoglycaemia, thyroid dysfunction, B12 and folate deficiencies.
Differential: acute neurological issues, malignancy (frail patients may not tolerate or benefit from invasive investigations or therapies; this needs to be mutually considered with the patient or advocates)

<!-- page:505 -->
486
Acute Medicine
Full medication reviews do not have to be done on the acute floor. Identifying and signposting on to an
appropriate service (pharmacist, GP or geriatrician) is sufficient for the acute physician.
Medication reviews may lead to addition of prescriptions including pain relief, laxatives, bone protection or
supplements.
Overview of the MDT
Acute event
Medical assessment
CGA initiated
MDT
assessment
Parallel working
Equipment and
care need
reviewed
Investigations
Time
Medically
optimised
Discharge ready
Therapy/social
complete
People over the age of 85 account for 25% of inpatient hospital bed days. CGA and MDT working encourages the consideration of wider issues that may impact patient well-being and promote safe, sustainable
discharges.
The acute floor CGA includes the functional, psychological, social and environmental factors which are
assessed by the MDT whilst medical assessment continues. Barriers to discharge are identified and addressed
enabling discharge when medically optimised. This reduces lengths of stay and hospital delay-related harm.
Physiotherapists focus on mobility assessments and the need for walking aids, onward community therapy
or falls programme referrals.
OT will review equipment and formal care needs. Patients admitted from 24-h placements may be better
assessed by community teams as returning to a place of safety may prevent hospital delay-related harm and
deconditioning.
Social workers source care packages and placements based on recommendations of the MDT. Safeguarding
concerns raised must be reviewed by the social work team prior to discharge.
Further reading
NHS Acute Frailty Network (2017) Acute care for frail older people toolkit. NHS Elect AFN Toolkit October
2017 edition.pdf. https://www.nhselect.nhs.uk/uploads/files/1/NHS%20Elect%20AFN%20Toolkit%20
October%202017%20edition.pdf.
The acute physician must competently identify the frailty phenotype and syndromes and initiate
management, including the CGA. Once urgent issues have been addressed pending domains can
be  handed over to a secondary (CGA MDT) or primary care (virtual ward, GP) team for ongoing
management.

<!-- page:506 -->
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
487
Royal Pharmaceutical Society Medicines optimisation. Rpharms.com
The Health Foundation Frailsafe: a safety checklist for frail older patients entering acute hospital care. https://
www.health.org.uk/improvement-project/
frailsafea-safety-checklistfor-frail-olderpatients-enteringacute-hospital.
