# CHAPTER 69 Delirium, dementia and cognitive disorders

- Pages: 507-512
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:507 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
488
Consider delirium in patients with:
•	 Abnormal cognitive function (confusion, impaired concentration, slow responses to questions – the patient
described as a ‘poor historian’).
•	 Abnormal mood (new onset ‘depression’).
•	 Abnormal perception (visual or auditory hallucinations).
•	 Abnormal behaviour (restlessness, agitation or reluctance to mobilize; unwillingness to eat or drink; abnormal sleep–wake cycle).
•	 Abnormal social behaviour (withdrawal from social contact; unwillingness to cooperate with care – the
patient described as ‘uncooperative’ or ‘difficult’).
Introduction
Delirium is a disorder characterized by disturbance of consciousness, attention and cognition, not accounted
for by pre-existing dementia. The term ‘acute confusional state’ is often used synonymously with delirium,
although delirium is preferred, as confusion (uncertainty about what is happening, intended or required) is not
specific to delirium and its medical definition is imprecise.
It can reflect a primary neurological disorder, substance intoxication or withdrawal, an adverse effect of drugs
(especially those with an anti-cholinergic effect) or a systemic disorder such as sepsis. Often it is multifactorial,
e.g. infection, hyponatraemia and side effects of medications. Causes of delirium are given in Appendix 69.1.
Distinguishing delirium from dementia is often a diagnostic challenge (see Table  69.1). Dementia and
delirium often co-exist and dementia is a major risk factor for delirium. It is also worth bearing in mind that
delirium is also a risk factor for the development of long-term cognitive decline. Several neuropsychiatric disorders may give rise to abnormal consciousness, language, memory or behaviour, and should be considered in
the differential diagnosis of delirium (Table 69.2).
Delirium is a clinical diagnosis; criteria are given in Table  69.2. History including a good collateral is
key to this.
Initial assessment of the patient with delirium is summarized in Figure 69.1.
Delirium, dementia and cognitive
disorders
Alexandra Montagu and Christopher Ambrose
CHAPTER 69

<!-- page:508 -->
Delirium, dementia and cognitive disorders
489
Table 69.1  Differentiating delirium from dementia.
Delirium
Dementia
Conscious
level
Can often be low (hypoactive) or agitated
(hyperactive)
Normal until late in disease
Onset
Acute onset
Gradual onset
Course of
disease
Fluctuations in symptoms are typical. Can resolve in
days to weeks, a proportion develop into chronic
delirium
Usual gradual decline, although fluctuation
in severity can sometimes suggest Lewy
body dementia
Attention
Deficits common
Deficits usually occur much later in the
progression of dementia
Reversibility
Reversibility with correction of the underlying cause
Usually permanent and progressive
Appendix 69.1  Causes of delirium.
Category of disorder
Examples/comment
Primary neurological disorders
Head injury
Post-ictal state
Non-dominant parietal lobe stroke
Subdural haematoma
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
NCSE
Meningitis
Encephalitis – infective or autoimmune
Raised intracranial pressure
Substance intoxication or
withdrawal
Alcohol intoxication or withdrawal
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
Intoxication with amphetamine and amphetamine-type drugs, benzodiazepines,
cannabis, cocaine, opioids and other psychoactive substances
Withdrawal of opioids
Adverse effect of drugs
Side effects of medications: Benzodiazepines, tricyclics, analgesics (especially opiates),
lithium, high-dose corticosteroids, and drugs for parkinsonism
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (Appendix 73.2)
Infection
Urinary or respiratory tract infections are the commonest causes.
Bacterial meningitis (Chapter 73), infective endocarditis (Chapter 15) and intraabdominal sepsis, e.g. cholangitis (Chapter 5), cellulitis should also be considered in
patients with delirium and signs of sepsis.
Exclude tropical diseases if there has been recent travel (Chapter 75).
Others
Constipation
Urinary retention
Hypoglycaemia
Hyperglycaemic states
Any organ failure
Severe electrolyte disorders
Severe endocrine disorders, e.g. hypothyroidism
Other metabolic disorders
Hypothermia

<!-- page:509 -->
490
Acute Medicine
Priorities
1	 Make a rapid assessment to ensure that airway, breathing and circulation are not compromised. Check
blood glucose and correct hypoglycaemia (Chapter 46).
2	 Assess the mental state. This can be done using the ten-item abbreviated mental test score (Table 69.3) or
similar screening test, e.g. 4 A’s Test (4AT) or Confusional Assessment method (CAM).
•	 The diagnosis of delirium is based on the criteria shown in Table 69.2. Delirium is characterized by a
change in the mental state (occurring over hours or days, often fluctuating over the course of the day),
associated with a causative factor (Appendix 69.1).
3	 What is causing delirium?
•	 Establish current symptoms, context and past history by talking to family members, carers, or hospital
staff and reviewing relevant medical records. Documentation from the ambulance worker’s initial assessment is often a very helpful source of information.
Table 69.2  Differential diagnosis of acutely disturbed behaviour or language.
Diagnosis
Comment
Delirium
Diagnostic criteria:
•	 There is a disturbance of attention and awareness.
•	 There is a change in cognition, such as memory deficit, disorientation, language
disturbance or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not better accounted
for by a pre-existing dementia.
•	 The disturbance has developed over a short period of time (usually hours to days) and
tends to fluctuate during the course of the day.
•	 There is evidence from the history, examination or laboratory findings that the disturbance
is caused either by the direct physiological consequences of a general medical condition, or
by substance intoxication/withdrawal or by medication.
Acute psychosis
(mania or
schizophrenic)
Typical features of acute psychosis include:
•	 Hallucinations
•	 Delusions
•	 Confused and disturbed thoughts
•	 Lack of insight and self-awareness
A diagnosis of delirium rather than acute psychosis is more likely if:
•	 The patient is older than 40 with no previous psychiatric history
•	 There are major medical comorbidities
•	 There is disorientation, clouding of consciousness or decreased alertness that fluctuates
throughout the day, or
•	 Physiological observations are abnormal
Other psychiatric
disorders
Agitated depression, anxiety disorder, borderline and anti-social personality disorders may
result in acutely disturbed behaviour.
Non-convulsive status
epilepticus (NCSE)
In NCSE, there are often mild clonic movements of the eyelids, face or hands, or simple
automatisms. The EEG is abnormal.
Transient global
amnesia
Abrupt onset of antegrade amnesia without clouding of consciousness or loss of personal
identity.
Cognitive impairment is limited to amnesia, and there are no focal neurological or epileptic
signs.
Symptoms resolve within 24 h.
Fluent aphasia
Speech is fluent but with meaningless words, unnecessary phrases and nonsensical grammar.
There is no clouding of consciousness.
Caused by an acute stroke or brain injury to Wernicke’s area
Source: Adapted from American Psychiatric Association (2013).

<!-- page:510 -->
Delirium, dementia and cognitive disorders
491
Table 69.3  Abbreviated mental test score.
•	 Age
•	 Time (to nearest hour)
•	 Address for recall at end of test – this should be repeated by the patient to ensure it has been heard correctly:
42 West Street
•	 Year
•	 Name of hospital
•	 Recognition of two people (e.g. doctor and nurse)
•	 Date of birth (day and month sufficient)
•	 Year of the Second World War
•	 Name of present monarch
•	 Count backwards 20–1
Each correct answer scores one mark. The healthy elderly score 8–10.
Assess using ABCDE method
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Stabilize airway, breathing and circulation
Correct hypoglycaemia
Focused assessment (see text)
Consider differential diagnosis (Table 69.1)
Urgent investigation (Table 69.4)
Suspected delirium?
  • Acute change in mental state
  • Disorientation in time
  • Impaired short-term memory
     and attention
  • Acute illness, intoxication or
     potentially causative medication
Diagnosis and treatment of underlying disorder(s)
(Appendix 69.1 and Table 69.2)
Exclude/treat sepsis (Chapter 5)
Stop medication likely to be causing or contributing to delirium
Supportive care (Table 69.5)
Patient with abnormal behaviour or language
Pursue other
diagnosis
No
Yes
Figure 69.1  Assessment of the patient with delirium.

<!-- page:511 -->
492
Acute Medicine
•	 Check the drug chart. Many drugs may cause delirium, notably benzodiazepines, tricyclics, analgesics
(including NSAIDs), lithium, corticosteroids and medications for parkinsonism.
•	 If a patient is admitted with delirium, establish what drugs were being taken prior to admission: if necessary, contact the patient’s general practitioner to check which drugs are prescribed, and ask relatives to
collect all medications in the home, including over-the-counter medications. Whether any medications
have been recently started or changed is of particular importance.
•	 Review the physiological observations and make a systematic examination. Check for focal chest signs,
abdominal tenderness or guarding, urinary retention, faecal impaction, pressure ulceration and cellulitis.
Are there abnormal neurological signs? As a minimum, examine for neck stiffness and lateralized weakness, and check the plantar responses.
•	 Consider non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) if there are mild clonic movements of the eyelids, face
or hands or simple automatisms. Diazepam (10 mg IV, at a rate of <2.5 mg/min) may terminate the status
with improvement in conscious level. Seek advice from a neurologist.
•	 Are there signs suggesting liver failure (jaundice, asterixis, ascites, signs of chronic liver disease)?
See Chapter  42 for further management of acute liver failure and decompensated chronic liver
disease.
•	 In patients with delirium in the context of alcohol-use disorder, check for other signs of Wernicke’s
encephalopathy: nystagmus, VI nerve palsy (unable to abduct the eye) and ataxia (wide-based gait; may
be unable to stand or walk). See Chapter 106 for management.
•	 Send a urine sample for microscopy and culture. Undertake a chest X-ray. Other investigations needed are
given in Table 69.4.
4	 Neuroimaging (by CT or MRI) is indicated if
•	 Delirium followed a fall or head injury.
•	 A primary neurological disorder (e.g. encephalitis) is suspected.
•	 There are new focal neurological signs.
•	 There is papilloedema or other evidence of raised intracranial pressure.
•	 The patient has cancer, HIV-AIDS or other cause of immunosuppression.
•	 The patient’s behaviour prevents adequate neurological examination.
•	 No systemic cause for the delirium is apparent.
Table 69.4  Urgent investigation in delirium.
Blood glucose
Plasma sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests, albumin and calcium
Full blood count
Prothrombin time or international normalized ratio (INR)
C-reactive protein
Blood culture if temperature <36 or >38 °C
Urine culture
ECG
Chest X-ray
Arterial blood gases
Neuroimaging, if indicated: see text (point 4)
Lumbar puncture, if indicated: see text (point 5)
EEG, if indicated: see text
Source: Reference: Oxford Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment eds Davey & Sprigings, OUP 2018. Reproduced with
permission.

<!-- page:512 -->
Delirium, dementia and cognitive disorders
493
5	 Lumbar puncture with examination of the cerebrospinal fluid should be done (assuming no
contraindication to lumbar puncture) if
•	 Suspicion of meningitis or encephalitis – consider autoimmune or infective.
•	 The patient is febrile and no systemic focus of infection is found.
•	 The cause of delirium remains unclear.
6	 Electroencephalography (EEG) is indicated if
•	 NCSE or encephalitis is suspected.
•	 It is unclear if the diagnosis is delirium or psychosis.
•	 No cause for delirium is apparent, despite investigation.
Further management
Identify and treat the underlying cause (Appendix 69.1; Table 69.2).
Ensure comprehensive supportive care (Table 69.5), with avoidance of physical restraint, and anticipation
and prevention of complications of delirium (e.g. dehydration, constipation and pressure ulceration).
•	 In the United Kingdom, Mental Capacity Act and Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards should be utilised as
needed.
•	 Review the drug chart. Avoid unnecessary medications, especially those with an anti-cholinergic effect.
•	 If needed, to relieve severe distress or prevent injury, give short-term therapy (one week or less) of haloperidol (in a dose of <3 mg daily) or olanzapine (the latter is contraindicated in patients with dementia). If the
patient has Parkinson’s disease/parkinsonism or Lewy Body Dementia then benzodiazepines are the drug of
choice. Seizures and alcohol withdrawal should also be treated with benzodiazepines.
Further reading
Fong TG, Davis D, Growdon ME, et al. (2015) The interface between delirium and dementia in elderly adults.
Lancet Neurol 14, 823–832.
Inouye SK, Westendorp RGJ, Saczynski JS. (2013) Delirium in elderly people. Lancet 383, 911–922.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2023) Delirium: Prevention, Diagnosis and Management
in Hospital and Long-Term Care. London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE).
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg103www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg103.
Woodford HJ, George J, Jackson M. (2015) Non-convulsive status epilepticus: a practical approach to
diagnosis in confused older people. Postgrad Med J 91, 655–661.
Table 69.5  Supportive care of the patient with delirium.
Exclude/treat sepsis
Stop medications likely to be causing or contributing to delirium
Prevent dehydration: ensure adequate fluid intake
Exclude/relieve urinary retention
Exclude/prevent constipation
Exclude/prevent pressure ulceration
Assess for/relieve pain
Prevent DVT: give thromboprophylaxis if indicated
Prevent sleep disturbance
Ensure spectacles and hearing aid are worn if needed
Reality orientation: give the patient information about time, place and person, repeated at regular intervals
