# CHAPTER 70 Perioperative medicine

- Pages: 513-521
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:513 -->
494
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Perioperative medicine is a rapidly growing medical specialty that focuses on the care of patients prior, during,
and after surgery in a multidisciplinary, patient-centred and integrated fashion. It includes assessment and
optimisation of patient’s health status prior to surgery, shared decision making regarding surgical options,
management of medical issues that may arise during the perioperative period, as well as guide rehabilitation.
The average age of surgical patients is increasing with one-third of people having surgery being 75 years or
older; these patients are at higher risk of postoperative mortality, more likely to experience medical rather than
surgical postoperative complications, have longer hospital stays and are at increased risk of discharge to a care
facility. The National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) reported that 30-day mortality was doubled in
patients aged over 65 years living with frailty (18% versus 9.3%). These changes require novel challenges
to our healthcare system and hence the increased importance and development of perioperative medicine
services. Depending on the hospital, the perioperative medicine team may cover a range of elective and
emergency surgical areas such as trauma, elective orthopaedics, general and vascular surgery.
There are several national databases such as the NHFD (National Hip Fracture Database), TARN (Trauma
Audit and Research Network) and NELA which are set up to monitor and improve surgical patients’ outcomes
in different surgical specialties in the NHS.
Orthogeriatrics
Orthogeriatricians provide the comprehensive perioperative care which is relevant to orthopaedic patients,
working closely with surgeons, anaesthetists and allied healthcare professionals. It originated in the UK in
1960s. A neck of femur (NOF) fracture is the most common serious fragility fracture among the elderly
accounting for 76,000 factures a year and an annual cost of approximately £2 billion. It is associated with
significant morbidity and mortality;10–20% of those admitted from home move to institutional care, 10% of
people die within first month, and about one third die within 12 months.
Hip fracture care is the area where the evidence for perioperative medicine is strongest, and the principles
for hip fracture care have led the way in the development of perioperative services in other surgical areas.
Benefits of this integrated care include higher functional outcomes, fewer postoperative complications,
reduced length of stay, and reduced mortality.
Much of the orthogeriatric model is based on Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA): a multidisciplinary diagnostic process which focuses on older patients undergoing surgery. There is emerging evidence that
CGA is beneficial to older elective and emergency surgical patients. Please refer to Chapter 68 for further
information on CGA.
Perioperative medicine
Shvaita Ralhan and Mustafa Alsahab
CHAPTER 70

<!-- page:514 -->
Perioperative medicine
495
Orthogeriatric assessment includes
•	 Identification and management of medical conditions (both pre-existing and new)
•	 Medications review
•	 Identification and management of frailty
•	 Consideration of ceilings of care and DNACPR status
•	 Assessment of cognition and delirium risk
•	 Decisions around capacity to consent to surgery
•	 Liaison with patients and their next of kin to articulate benefits and risks of surgery
•	 Discharge planning
•	 Falls assessments
•	 Review of bone health
Major trauma geriatrics
Major trauma was previously considered a disease of young men with the predominant mechanism of injury
being road traffic accidents. However, what constitutes major trauma in the western world has changed. The
combination of an ageing population, rising incidence of osteoporosis and improved road safety means that
over 50% of major trauma occurs in those above the age of 65 falling from standing height. The commonest
injuries sustained in this age group are head, spinal and thoracic injuries. Trauma in this age group is often
termed ‘stealth trauma’ as it is harder to identify for the following reasons:
•	 lower mechanism of injury
•	 pre-existing cognitive impairment and brain atrophy making traumatic brain injury less obvious
•	 comorbidities or their treatment make haemodynamic compromise due to blood loss harder to identify e.g.
beta blocker treatment for arrythmias masking the expected tachycardia
The acute physician must therefore have a high index of suspicion for trauma in this age group to avoid missing injuries given the differing routes of referral of these patients into the hospital. Furthermore, many of these
injuries are managed conservatively, or a cohort of these patients may be deemed unsuitable for invasive surgical treatment due to their frailty or comorbidities so may well be under the care of medical specialties rather
than the surgeons. Rib fractures, in particular, have been deemed a Cinderella condition in this group where
standardisation of care and outcomes for patients are poor. Chest X-rays are inadequate and early CT is the gold
standard allowing accurate identification of injuries that usually carry high risk of morbidity and mortality.
Analgesia (including involvement of pain teams to consider regional anaesthetic blocks) is the cornerstone of
treatment, coupled with chest physiotherapy and a low threshold for antibiotics as many develop pneumonia as
a complication. Since the introduction of the best practice tariff uplift for clinical frailty assessment in major
trauma geriatric patients in 2019 in England, many major trauma centres have developed perioperative medicine services for major trauma providing much needed expert knowledge in this growing patient group.
Aspects of perioperative medicine that acute physicians are commonly asked to advise on are covered in
more detail below.
Cognition and delirium management
Post-operative delirium is the commonest complication in the older surgical population and has significant
implications. It increases hospital stay by 2–3 days, has a 30-day mortality of 7–10%, and also increases healthcare resource expenditure. It is most prevalent in those with preoperative cognitive disorders, those undergoing
complex or emergency surgery and those undergoing orthopaedic surgery where the risk can be as high as

<!-- page:515 -->
496
Acute Medicine
60%. Those with hypoactive delirium have poorer outcomes. Delirium assessment includes cognitive screening
(most commonly AMTS & 4AT score) pre and postoperatively. Perioperative measures that can be taken to
prevent or reduce severity of delirium include:
•	 Avoidance of hypotension (usually defined as a 20% reduction in BP from baseline or a BP below
100 mmHg)
•	 Avoidance of hypoxia
•	 Limit length and depth of anaesthesia when delirium risk is high
•	 Limit the use of delirium inducing drugs e.g. opiates, benzodiazepines
•	 Taking a thorough drug and alcohol history to avoid withdrawal symptoms
•	 Perioperative treatment with antipsychotics before delirium develops. This is not widespread practice as
studies were small and limited to elective hip, elective knee and hip fracture surgery. However, it is worth
considering in some patients with a significant risk of florid delirium. A typical regime is haloperidol 0.5 mg
BD for three days starting preoperatively.
All perioperative delirium should be documented and discussed with the patient or their relatives, with
repeat cognitive testing after recovery from surgery in the community. Assessment of cognition in the perioperative period will also contribute to the assessment of capacity with respect to consent for surgery. Please refer
to Chapter 69 for further information on general management of delirium.
Analgesia
It is estimated that at least 80% of patients experience acute postoperative pain. Poorly controlled post
operative pain can cause various adverse outcomes such as delirium, prolong admission, increase morbidity,
delay rehabilitation and contribute to the development of chronic pain syndrome. Multimodal analgesia
(MMA) is the use of multiple pain management medications during the perioperative period. The goal is to
optimise pain control and minimise using high dose opioids. MMA includes paracetamol, ketamine, NSAIDs,
regional analgesia, and opioids. An individualised approach is needed for every patient and should
consider:
•	 Severity of pain
•	 Preoperative opiate use
•	 Renal impairment
•	 Variable absorption e.g. in surgical conditions that involve pathology of the GI tract
•	 Side effects e.g. co-prescription of laxatives & naloxone with all opiates
Non-opioid analgesia such as paracetamol is rarely problematic but NSAIDs should be used more
cautiously, particularly in the elderly and patients with other comorbidities due to their potential side
effects on the renal tract, upper GI tract and cardiovascular system. Weak opioids such as codeine are
commonly used in the perioperative period but it is important to recognise that these are prodrugs and
their effectiveness is influenced by the individual patient’s ability to metabolise the drug. 5–10% of the
population are poor metabolisers of codeine, and get little therapeutic benefit from these medications and
10% of the Caucasian and 30% of the African population are ultrarapid metabolisers leading to a higher
risk of opiate toxicity. Strong opioid analgesics such as morphine and oxycodone are often needed in the
perioperative period but require vigilant monitoring due to the risk of respiratory depression particularly in
those with renal impairment.
Regional anaesthesia techniques (usually delivered by specialist pain teams or the emergency department)
such as a fascia iliaca block in femoral fractures and erector spinae blocks in rib fractures, enhance perioperative pain control and reduce opioid use, and are therefore an important aspect to consider when managing
perioperative pain.

<!-- page:516 -->
Perioperative medicine
497
Frailty and surgical outcomes
Frailty is a state of increased vulnerability to stressors due to a decline in physiological function and reserve in
organ systems, resulting in adverse outcomes. Preoperative frailty independently predicts:
•	 higher frequency and severity of postoperative complications
•	 increased length of stay and rehabilitation period
•	 discharge to an assisted-living facility
•	 higher delirium risk
•	 poor wound healing and tissue damage
•	 higher mortality
The ageing process reduces physiological reserve making frailty more common in the elderly. However, frailty
is not exclusively a syndrome of the elderly and is distinct to comorbidity. A study on emergency laparotomy
showed greater mortality hazard ratios for those with higher Clinical Frailty Scale grades: 4 (3.93, 95% CI
1.89–8.20), 5 (5.86, 95% CI 2.87–11.97), and 6–7 (14.17, 95% CI 7.33–27.40). These findings were not
confounded by the indication for surgery, sepsis, intraperitoneal soiling or malignancy status.
Recognising and managing frailty in surgical patients is important to try to improve outcomes, set appropriate expectations, and to frame discussions around appropriate treatment escalation plans and decisions about
resuscitation when perioperative risks are high. The most commonly used frailty screening tool in preoperative
assessment is the Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) due to its simplicity and speed of completion. Once frailty has been
identified a frailty assessment tool such as the Edmonton Frail Scale can provide more in-depth information
regarding domains/targets for managing frailty prior to the operation. Please refer to Chapter 68 on frailty for
further information.
Treatment escalation plans
It is important to establish as soon as possible whether the patient has an existing advanced care plan, a lasting
power of attorney or any specific wishes about resuscitation in the event of a cardiac or respiratory arrest.
When the risk of surgery is high it is vital to establish the patients premorbid functional and cognitive status so
decisions about treatment escalation including appropriateness of HDU, ITU and multiorgan support can be
made, ideally prior to going to theatre.
Perioperative nutrition and hydration
Nutritional status is a known determinant of surgical outcomes. Perioperative nutritional support, especially in
malnourished surgical patients and those at risk of it improves surgical outcomes. The first step is nutritional
screening using a validated screening tool such as the Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) and to ensure
nutritional team support for those at high risk. Metabolic optimisation through preoperative carbohydrate loading
and postoperative glycaemic control are commonly adopted strategies in elective surgery; carbohydrate loading
using isotonic carbohydrate solutions the night prior to surgery and 2 h before surgery. Postoperative hyperglycaemia can be avoided by reducing preoperative fasting, early postoperative feeding, and a glucose-insulin infusion if
required. Please refer to The ERAS (Enhanced Recovery After Surgery) society guidelines for further details.
Preoperatively: ensure adequate hydration and allow clear fluid until 2 h prior to surgery. Ensure extra fluid
replacement for those with high stoma output and enterocutaneous fistula. Some local protocols allow
ensure juices up to 2 h before theatre; these are considered a clear fluid.
Intraoperatively: maintain fluid balance and avoid excessive IV fluid. Fluid replacement should be guided by
monitoring parameters using Hartmann’s as it is more physiological, reducing the risk of hyperchloremia which

<!-- page:517 -->
498
Acute Medicine
is more common with normal saline. Blood transfusion is guided by blood loss and transfusion thresholds
should be adjusted in patients with a history of ischaemic heart disease to prevent perioperative cardiac events.
Postoperatively: encourage early oral intake and supplemental IV fluid if inadequate oral intake, early removal
of NG tube and maintaining fluid balance. Consider enteral or parental nutrition when oral intake delayed.
Perioperative medication management
in emergency surgery
Decisions about stopping or continuing medications perioperatively are based on risks of withdrawal,
risks of disease progression if therapy is discontinued, risks of drug interactions with anaesthetic medications and the patient’s short-term quality of life. Table 70.1 below summarises common medications that
should be suspended, those that should be continued, and some where careful clinical judgement may
be required.
Table 70.1  Perioperative Medication Management (1, 2).
Medications to be suspended:
•	 ACE inhibitors and ARBs (risk of AKI and hypotension outweighs the harm of a moderately high blood pressure).
•	 Calcium channel blockers: risk of hypotension and urinary retention.
•	 Diuretics: risk of hypovolemia and electrolytes depletion.
•	 Metformin: omit on the day of the procedure, and for 48 h when having contrast injection or if eGFR less than
60 mL/min/1.73 m2.
•	 SGLT-3 inhibitors: risk of euglycemic ketoacidosis, Ideally stop before surgery and only restart on discharge.
•	 NSAIDs: risk of AKI and GI bleeding.
•	 Warfarin: reverse anticoagulant effects, aim INR = <1.5 on day of surgery. Warfarin can be reversed with
prothrombin complex (PCC) or IV vitamin K 5–10 mg. For patients with high thrombotic risk, seek an opinion from a
Haematologist regarding bridging therapy.
•	 DOAC: hold 24–96 h, based on DOAC type, bleeding risks, and renal function. Reversal agents such as
idarucizumab can be used for dabigatran, and andexanet for apixaban and rivaroxaban in certain clinical scenarios.
For patients with high thrombotic risk, seek opinion from a Haematologist.
Medications to be continued:
•	 Parkinson’s Disease medications: time critical medication that must be given even if NBM for theatre. Consider a
Rotigotine patch or NG route if the patient’s swallow is unsafe or the patient cannot tolerate oral route.
•	 Antiepileptics: time critical medication that must be converted to the IV route where possible. Levetiracetam,
phenobarbital, phenytoin and sodium valproate can all be converted to IV with a 1 : 1 conversion rate.
Carbamazepine can be converted to rectal administration with a 25% increase in the dose.
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants: risk of delirium, confusion and depressive symptoms.
•	 Benzodiazepines: risk of benzodiazepine withdrawal.
•	 Long term steroids: double the dose orally or give IV hydrocortisone if oral route unavailable for three days minimum.
•	 Long-acting insulin.
•	 B-blocker (unless bradycardic or hypotensive).
•	 Digoxin (unless bradycardic or AKI).
•	 Alpha 2 agonist: Clonidine, Methyldopa (risk of rebound hypertension).
•	 Levothyroxine and Anti-thyroid drugs.
•	 Statins.
•	 DPP-4 inhibitor (e.g., sitagliptin).
•	 SSRIs (risks of exacerbation of mood disorders).
•	 Antipsychotics (risks of psychotic crisis).
Medications where clinical judgment is exercised:
•	 Aspirin and/or Clopidogrel: depends on indications of the antiplatelets, bleeding risks of the surgery and its urgency.
In general, Aspirin and/or Clopidogrel can be continued unless spinal anaesthesia is the safest option and in high
bleeding risk operations. Seek opinions from a Perioperative Medicine Consultant/Anaesthetist/ Cardiologist.

<!-- page:518 -->
Perioperative medicine
499
References
1	 Johnson S, Haywood C. (2022) Perioperative medication management for older people. J Pharm Pract Res
52, 391–401. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/jppr.1834 (accessed 20 July 2024).
2	 Whinney C. (2009) Perioperative medication management: general principles and practical applications.
Cleve Clin J Med. 76(Suppl 4), S126–S132. 10.3949/ccjm.76.s4.20. PMID: 19880829 (accessed 20 July
2024).
Further reading
Abebe MM, Arefayne NR, Temesgen MM, Admass BA. (2022) Evidence-based perioperative pain
management protocol for day case surgery in a resource limited setting: systematic review. Ann Med Surg
80, 104322. DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104322 (accessed 28 July 2024).
British Orthopaedic Association, British Geriatrics Society (2007) The blue book: the care of patients with
fragility fracture. www.fractures.com/pdf/BOA-BGS-Blue-Book.pdf (accessed 1 August 2024).
Isand KG, Hussain SF, Sadiqi M, et al. (2024) Impact of frailty on outcomes following emergency laparotomy:
a retrospective analysis across diverse clinical conditions. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg: DOI: 10.1007/s00068-
024-02632-6 (accessed 27 August 2024).
Jin Z, Hu J, Ma D. (2020) Postoperative delirium: perioperative assessment, risk reduction, and management.
Br J Anaesth 125(4), 492–504. DOI: 10.1016/j.bja.2020.06.063 (accessed 28 July 2024).
Miller RL, Barnes JD, Mouton R, et al. (2022) Comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) in perioperative
care: a systematic review of a complex intervention. BMJ Open 12, e062729. Available at:
https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/12/10/e062729 (accessed 28 July 2024).

<!-- page:520 -->
Infectious Diseases
SECTION 8
