# CHAPTER 71 Cellulitis and necrotising fasciitis

- Pages: 522-525
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:522 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
503
Assessment of suspected cellulitis is given in Figure 71.1.
Priorities
Make a focused assessment and consider the differential diagnosis (Figure 71.1, Table 71.1). Bilateral cellulitis
is very rare. Mark the margin of affected skin with a single-use surgical skin marker. Investigation required
urgently is given in Table 71.2.
If cellulitis is the likely diagnosis, assess the severity of the illness, on the basis of the clinical features and
comorbidities, and manage the patient accordingly (Tables 71.3 and 71.4).
If necrotising fasciitis is suspected, give IV fluid, start antibiotic therapy after blood cultures have been drawn
(Table 71.4), and seek urgent advice from a plastic surgeon and an Infection specialist.
Cellulitis and necrotising fasciitis
David Sprigings and John L. Klein
CHAPTER 71
Cellulitis is an acute spreading bacterial infection of the deeper dermis and subcutaneous tissue,
typically of the lower leg, which may complicate a wound, ulcer, interdigital fungal infection or primary
skin disorder. Predisposing factors include previous episodes of cellulitis, limb oedema and lymphoedema.
Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A streptococcus) and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common
causative organisms.
Erysipelas is an acute bacterial infection of the upper dermis and epidermis, which may be clinically
distinguished from cellulitis by a more clearly demarcated border between infected and healthy skin.
Assessment and management are the same as for cellulitis.
Necrotising fasciitis is a rapidly progressive infection of the deep fascia and muscle, and should be
suspected in an ill patient with severe pain and marked local tenderness. In the later stages, the skin
may show blue-black discolouration and blistering. The majority of cases are polymicrobial and caused
by anaerobes, Gram-negative bacilli and streptococci (not S. pyogenes). Most other cases are caused by
S. pyogenes or Clostridium perfringens (gas gangrene). Management requires resuscitation, antibiotic
therapy and debridement.
Box 71.1  Cellulitis, erysipelas and necrotising fasciitis

<!-- page:523 -->
504
Acute Medicine
Further management
Any underlying skin disorder should be treated. Seek advice from a dermatologist.
Supportive care of the patient with cellulitis of the lower leg includes:
•	 Elevation of the limb
•	 Use of a bed cradle
•	 Analgesia
•	 DVT prophylaxis
•	 Adequate hydration
•	 Treatment of comorbidities, for example diabetes
Clinical improvement is usually seen after 2–3 days, and with this, patients treated initially with IV antibiotic
therapy can be switched to oral therapy, to complete a 5 – 7 day course. If there is no improvement at this time,
other diagnoses should be considered and a dermatological opinion obtained.
Suspected cellulitis
Painful swelling and erythema of the skin, typically of the lower leg
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment. Mark margin of affected skin.
Consider differential diagnosis (Table 71.1)
Urgent investigation (Table 71.2)
Ill patient with severe pain and marked local tenderness?
Yes
Manage as necrotizing fasciitis
Fluid resuscitation
IV antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Seek urgent advice from
infection specialist and
microbiologist
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Clinical picture
typical of cellulitis?
Assess severity of illness (Table 71.3)
Antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Supportive care
Improvement after 2–3 days?
Change to oral antibiotics
Consider other diagnoses (Table 71.1)
Refer to dermatologist
Figure 71.1  Assessment of suspected cellulitis.

<!-- page:524 -->
Cellulitis and necrotising fasciitis
505
Table 71.1  Disorders that may be mistaken for cellulitis.
Disorder
Distinguishing features
Necrotising fasciitis
Ill patient. Severe pain disproportionate to physical signs. Soft tissue may be
very tender, with blue-black discolouration, blistering and (less commonly)
crepitus. Rapid clinical progression (over hours)
Leg eczema (venous eczema or
contact dermatitis) (NB cellulitis may
complicate eczema)
Longer history
May be bilateral
No fever or systemic symptoms
Itching rather than tenderness of the skin
History of varicose veins or deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Crusting or scaling (in cellulitis the skin is typically smooth and shiny)
DVT (NB DVT may complicate cellulitis)
Proximal margin of erythema usually not well demarcated. If clinical setting
suggests DVT (Chapter 31), duplex scan of leg veins is needed to exclude this.
Allergic reaction to insect sting or bite
No ascending lymphangitis, itching, may be urticaria
Chronic oedema/lymphoedema (NB
cellulitis may complicate chronic
oedema or lymphoedema)
Usually bilateral. Erythema may be feature.
No fever
Gouty arthritis
Arthritis prominent. Typically involves first metatarsophalangeal joint
(Chapter 92).
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Rapidly enlarging painful ulcer. Associated systemic disease (most often
inflammatory bowel disease) in 50%.
Table 71.2  Urgent investigation in suspected cellulitis or necrotising fasciitis.
Full blood count
C-reactive protein
Electrolytes and renal function
Blood culture (in class 3 or 4 illness – see Table 71.3)
Microscopy and culture of blister fluid if present
Urgent imaging (e.g. CT or MRI scan) may be useful in suspected necrotising fasciitis
Urgent Gram stain of debrided tissue (in necrotising fasciitis)
Duplex scan if deep venous thrombosis is possible (Chapter 31)
Table 71.3  Cellulitis: assessment of severity of illness and management.
Class
Features
Management
1
No significant systemic illness
No uncontrolled comorbidities
Oral antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Outpatient management
2
Significant systemic illness or comorbidity (e.g. peripheral
arterial disease, morbid obesity)
IV antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Outpatient/inpatient management*
3
Haemodynamic instability or delirium. Limb-threatening
infection due to vascular compromise
Comorbidities that may interfere with response to therapy
IV antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Inpatient management: level 1/HDU
4
Sepsis syndrome and/or
Suspected necrotising fasciitis
IV antibiotic therapy (Table 71.4)
Inpatient management: HDU/ITU
* Contraindications to outpatient management of patients with class 2 cellulitis:
•	 Penicillin/cephalosporin allergy
•	 Chronic liver or renal (CKD 4 or 5) disease
•	 Immunosuppression
•	 Facial or orbital cellulitis
•	 Non-compliance with outpatient management likely
•	 Unable to cope at home.
Source: Eron LJ (2000) Infections of skin and soft tissue: outcomes of a classification scheme. Clinical Infectious Diseases
31, 287 (A432). Reproduced with permission of Oxford University Press.

<!-- page:525 -->
506
Acute Medicine
Patients who have recurrent episodes of cellulitis should be considered for prophylactic antibiotic therapy:
seek advice from a dermatologist or infection specialist.
Further reading
Hua C, Urbina T, Bosc R, et al. (2023) Necrotising soft-tissue infections. Lancet Infect Dis, e81–e94.
Sartelli M, Coccolini F, Kluger Y, et al. (2022) WSES/GAIS/WSIS/SIS-E/AAST global clinical pathways for
patients with skin and soft tissue infections. World J Emerg Surg 17, 3.
Table 71.4  Initial antibiotic therapy in cellulitis and necrotising fasciitis.
Setting
Organisms to be covered
in addition to
Streptococcus pyogenes
and Staphylococcus aureus
Antibiotic therapy
Not allergic
to penicillin
Penicillin allergy
Otherwise well
Nil
Flucloxacillin
Clarithromycin or clindamycin
Known or suspected to
be methicillin-resistant
S. aureus (MRSA) colonised
MRSA
Vancomycin
or teicoplanin
Vancomycin or teicoplanin
Diabetes with foot ulcer
Gram-negative and anaerobic
bacteria
Co-amoxiclav
Clindamycin
Human/animal bite
Mixed oral flora including
anaerobes
Co-amoxiclav
Doxycycline + metronidazole
Suspected necrotising
fasciitis*
Streptococci, Gram-negative
bacilli and anaerobic bacteria
Piperacillin/
tazobactam
Vancomycin or
teicoplanin + gentamicin + metronidazole
* If strong microbiologic or clinical evidence of S. pyogenes infection, consider adding clindamycin and administration of
intravenous immunoglobulin (discuss with Infection specialist)
