# CHAPTER 72 Urinary tract infection

- Pages: 526-532
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:526 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
507
Consider urinary tract infection (UTI) when the patient has symptoms directly referable to the urinary tract:
•	 Dysuria, frequency, sensation of incomplete voiding
•	 Haematuria
•	 Lower abdominal, suprapubic or loin pain
•	 Abdominal pain and/or fever in pregnancy
UTI is in the differential diagnosis of non-specific presentations:
•	 Unwell after urological intervention or catheterization
•	 General malaise or fever in patients with long-term urinary catheter
•	 Delirium or vomiting, with or without fever (especially in children or the elderly)
•	 Frailty syndromes including falls, confusion, functional decline
•	 Septic shock, without localizing signs (Chapter 5).
Point-of-care (POC) urinary testing by urinary dipstick in those with symptoms suggestive of UTI, assessing
for pyuria, is sensitive and specific in the non-immunosuppressed population, and can support or deter the
diagnosis at the patient’s bedside. POC urine tests are not reliable in frail patients or in catheterized patients
where asymptomatic bacteriuria is common.
Priorities
1	 Determine whether the infection is uncomplicated or complicated (Table  72.1) by clinical assessment
(Table 72.2), review of previous microbiology results and previous investigations (Tables 72.3 and 72.4). This
will guide the need for further investigation, the choice of empirical antibiotic therapy, the length of treatment, and the requirement for follow-up.
It is not always apparent at the time of acute presentation whether the infection is complicated or not,
but this may become obvious later in the course of treatment.
•	 Uncomplicated: simple lower urinary tract infection in an otherwise healthy, non-pregnant woman.
•	 Complicated: UTI in the presence of an underlying condition that increases the risk of infection or the
chance of failing therapy (Table 72.1).
Urinary tract infection
Carolyn Hemsley, Claire van Nispen tot Pannerden, and Nicola Jones
CHAPTER 72

<!-- page:527 -->
508
Acute Medicine
Table 72.2  Focused assessment of the patient with suspected urinary tract infection.
History
•	 Major symptoms and time course – differentiate between lower urinary tract symptoms, upper tract symptoms and
systemic features
•	 Previous history of urinary tract infections
•	 Antibiotic history
•	 Presence/absence of urinary catheter, recent catheterization, blocked catheter, catheter change
•	 History of recent urinary tract intervention or urological intervention
•	 Previous history of renal tract pathology such as chronic kidney disease, renal stones, single kidney, structural
abnormality
•	 Pregnancy?
•	 Diabetes?
•	 Sexual history
•	 If primarily urethritis or penile discharge, consider sexually transmitted infections (Neisseria gonorrhoea, Chlamydia
trachomatis, Herpes simplex, Trichomonas vaginalis)
•	 Symptoms of sexually transmitted infections and PID or epididymo-orchitis?
•	 Review any recent GP or hospital microbiology results
•	 Consider points relevant to differential diagnosis – gastrointestinal symptoms
Examination
•	 Vital signs and key observations if critically ill and resuscitate as appropriate
•	 Assessment of presence/absence of loin tenderness
•	 Presence or absence of catheter and quality of catheter urine
•	 Consider alternative source of sepsis
Note: Gram-negative sepsis secondary to a urinary focus can be difficult to distinguish from suspected acute respiratory
tract infection in the elderly.
Table 72.1  Factors suggestive of complicated urinary tract infection.
Patient demographics
Very young or advanced age
Pregnancy
Male sex
Comorbidities
Diabetes mellitus
Immunosuppression
Renal transplant
Chronic kidney disease
Anatomical abnormalities
Urinary tract instrumentation, including urethral catheter, ureteric stent, nephrostomy
Prostatic pathology
Urethral stricture
Renal or bladder stones
Other factors
Health-care-associated infection
Failure of recent antimicrobial therapy

<!-- page:528 -->
Urinary tract infection
509
2	 If the patient is febrile or has significant systemic upset send peripheral blood as well as urine for culture
before starting appropriate empirical antibiotics (Tables 72.5 and 72.6).
•	 The choice of agent depends on local epidemiology and resistance rates of common urinary pathogens
and is usually indicated by local and national guidelines, e.g. NICE guidelines Ng 109–113.
•	 Consider recent antibiotic history, especially if considering treatment failure.
Table 72.3  Urgent investigations in suspected urinary tract infection.
Suspected simple uncomplicated UTI
•	 Urine for dipstick as a point-of-care test to detect presence/absence of nitrites and leucocyte esterase
•	 Urine dipstick for glucose
•	 Send urine for microscopy, culture and sensitivities – before antibiotics are started (may not be needed if first
presentation of lower urinary tract infection in a woman) (Box 72.1)
Suspected complicated UTI
•	 Urine dipstick and culture as above
•	 Full blood count
•	 C-reactive protein
•	 Electrolytes, urea and creatinine, liver function tests
•	 Venous blood gas for lactate
•	 Blood glucose
•	 Pregnancy test in women of childbearing age with lower abdominal symptoms
•	 CT KUB – if history of renal stones or features of renal colic
•	 Renal/urinary tract ultrasonography – urgent in the setting of acute kidney injury
•	 Blood cultures
Table 72.4  Indications for renal/urinary tract imaging.
Urgent
Features of renal colic or suspicion of renal stones +/ renal tract obstruction (plain X-ray and CT KUB)
As soon as possible (renal ultrasound is the usual initial investigation):
•	 Acute kidney injury
•	 Pyelonephritis in men or children
•	 Recurrent episode of pyelonephritis in women
•	 History of renal pathology
•	 Persistent fever despite 48–72 h of appropriate antibiotic
•	 Uncertain diagnosis, for example considering genitourinary pathology or appendicitis
Referral for renal tract imaging post treatment of acute infection
•	 Urinary infection in boys and men with no known risk factors for UTI
•	 Recurrent urinary tract infections (>three/year)
•	 Haematuria
Not indicated
•	 Uncomplicated lower tract infection in women
•	 First episode of pyelonephritis in women with no AKI and rapid treatment response (within defervescence within 48–72 h)
A urinary tract infection (UTI) is defined by the presence of ≥103–104 organisms per mL urine, associated
with clinical symptoms. Causative organisms are given in Appendix 72.1.
UTI encompasses simple lower urinary tract infection (cystitis), upper urinary tract infection
(pyelonephritis, pyonephrosis) and infection resulting in bacteraemia and septic shock.
Box 72.1  Definitions.

<!-- page:529 -->
510
Acute Medicine
•	 Consider recent microbiological culture results if available.
•	 Mode of delivery of the antibiotic (intravenous versus oral) will depend on the acuity of the illness and
ability of the patient to tolerate oral antibiotics.
•	 Review choice of antibiotic in light of pregnancy, allergy history and potential interactions with concomitant regular medication.
3	 If suspected uncomplicated urinary tract infection (i.e. only lower urinary tract symptoms in a young woman
with no features of systemic upset and no previous antimicrobial therapy) then treatment with empirical
antibiotic without the need for urine culture is appropriate (Table 72.5). The patient should be advised to
return if treatment fails to resolve symptoms, at which point urinary culture is indicated to guide further
correct antimicrobial selection. Uncomplicated UTI or pyelonephritis in a young woman with complete
symptom resolution does not need follow-up.
Table 72.5  Empirical antibiotic therapy in suspected urinary tract infection.
Always refer to any local guidelines as resistance rates vary, and consider community versus health-care associated
infection (HAI). HAIs are commonly more resistant than community acquired UTIs. Examples of standard
recommendations are given below.
Consider also adverse effects associated with some antibiotics (e.g. fluoroquinolones) and risks of Clostridium difficile
infection. Agents with higher risk of CDI include the ‘4 Cs’ – amoxicillin-clavulanate (co-amoxiclav), ceftriaxone,
clindamycin and ciprofloxacin. Agents with lower risk of CDI include trimethoprim, cefalexin, nitrofurantoin,
sulphamethoxazole-trimethoprim (co-trimoxazole), amoxicllin, doxycyline and gentamicin.
Simple community-acquired lower urinary tract infection
Refer to NICE guideline 109
Trimethoprim 200 mg 12-hourly PO PO or nitrofurantoin 100 mg 12-hourly PO
Women - three days;
Men - seven days treatment
(Nitrofurantoin is not appropriate if upper renal tract or prostatitis is possible as it does not achieve reliable prostatic or
renal parenchymal tissue concentrations. Nitrofurantoin is also not appropriate if eGFR is <45 mL/min.)
Simple health-care-associated acquired lower urinary tract infection
1st line: Nitrofurantoin 100 mg 12-hourly PO or trimethoprim 200 mg 12-hourly
2nd line: Pivmecillinam 400 mg initial dose then 200 mg 8-hourly or fosfomycin 3 g single dose
Women - three days;
Men - seven days treatment
Suspected pyelonephritis
Refer to NICE guideline 111
Aminoglycoside (e.g. gentamicin* 5 mg/kg) OD IV plus IV amoxicillin 1–2 g 8 hourly IV
or
Aminoglycoside (e.g. gentamicin* 5 mg/kg) OD IV plus a first or second-generation cephalosporin IV (e.g. cefazolin or
cefuroxime)
or Ambulatory care options for pyelonephritis include
Cefalexin 500 mg twice or three times a day (up to 1 to 1.5 g three or four times a day for severe infections) for 7 to
10 days
Or, Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 960 mg 12-hourly PO for 7-10 days
Or, trimethoprim 200 mg twice a day for 14 days (only if known susceptible organism)
Or, Co-amoxiclav 500/125 mg three times a day for 7 to 10 days (only if known susceptible organism)
Or, Oral quinolone (e.g. ciprofloxacin 500 mg po 12 hourly for 7 days) if other options are not possible and mild illness
in a patient in whom the likelihood of quinolone resistance is <10% (based on local epidemiology) and there has been
no quinolone exposure in the last three to six months.
Or Gentamicin * 5 mg/kg OD IV
In all cases, subsequent antibiotic therapy post 48 h should be tailored to an appropriate single agent on receipt of
susceptibility data and consider IV to oral switch depending on defervescence and clinical improvement.
*gentamicin can be given on a daily basis for treatment of UTI; therapeutic drug monitoring is recommended, gentamicin
levels should be measured 6–14 h after administration so that dosing interval can be calculated from nomogram
[BMJ 2012;345, e6354. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e6354]. Possible adverse effects are nephrotoxicity and vestibular toxicity.

<!-- page:530 -->
Urinary tract infection
511
4	 Relieve acute urinary retention. UTI is a common precipitant for acute on chronic retention in older men
with prostatic enlargement and partial bladder outflow obstruction. Constipation can be a precipitant of
Retention and UTI in older females.
•	 Catheterize if in acute urinary retention.
•	 Unblock or replace blocked infected urinary catheters with appropriate antibiotic cover if long-term
catheter in situ.
•	 Treat constipation
5	 If there is an associated acute kidney injury, manage this along standard lines (Chapter 86).
•	 Ensure appropriate fluid management including input/output chart.
•	 Arrange ultrasonography of the kidneys and urinary tract to exclude obstruction requiring intervention.
6	 Consider the need for urinary tract imaging (Table 72.4).
Further management
1	 Review urinary culture results and change antimicrobial therapy as guided by susceptibility data. Urine
culture results will usually be available at 24–48 h. Antibiotic course length depends on the clinical picture
and whether it is uncomplicated or complicated UTI (Tables 72.1, 72.5 and 72.6).
2	 If persisting fever at 72 h or ongoing symptoms or sepsis despite antimicrobial therapy:
•	 Consider wrong diagnosis. If dysuria, consider perineal candidiasis, vaginitis, urethritis or sexually transmitted infection.
•	 If suprapubic or abdominal discomfort, review the need for abdominal imaging to exclude an alternative diagnosis, for example salpingitis, diverticulitis, appendicitis. Is the patient on the appropriate antimicrobial therapy?
•	 Review microbiology results and discuss antibiotic therapy with microbiologist or infection specialist.
•	 Has renal tract imaging been performed (Table 72.4)? Consider the presence of underlying complete or
partial upper renal tract obstruction needing decompression. Consider the presence of a collection
requiring drainage (radiologically guided or surgical).
3	 Decide if you should refer to a urologist, either acutely or for follow-up (Table 72.7):
•	 Decompression of upper renal tract if ureteric obstruction is present, for example by nephrostomy.
•	 Drainage of perinephric collections or renal abscess.
•	 Men with recurrent cystitis should be evaluated for prostatitis.
Table 72.6  Common antimicrobials in the treatment of urinary tract infection.
Drug
Absorption (bioavailability
following oral admin)
Amount excreted
unchanged in urine
Dosing in renal impairment
Amoxicillin
89%
60%
Oral – high dose amoxicillin reduce dose
if eGFR <10 mL/min
IV – high dose amoxicillin reduce dose if
eGFR <30 mL/min (risk of crystalluria
with high doses)
Co-amoxiclav
75%
60% amoxicillin
40% clavulanic acid
Oral – no dose adjustment required
IV – reduce dose if eGFRl <30 mL/min
Cefalexin
>90%
>90%
Reduce dose if eGFR <50 mL/min
Ciprofloxacin
70–80%
40–70%
Oral – reduce dose if eGFR <20 mL/min
IV – reduce dose if eGFR <20 mL/min
Trimethoprim
>90%
40–60%
Reduce dose if eGFR <30 mL/min
Nitrofurantoin
94% (lower if administered
without food)
30–40%
Contraindicated if eGFR <45 mL/min
Fosfomycin
40%
>70%
Avoid if eGFR <10 mL/min
Gentamicin
N/A
95%
Reduce dose if eGFR <20 mL/min
Amikacin
N/A
95%
Reduce dose if eGFR <20 mL/min

<!-- page:531 -->
512
Acute Medicine
4	 Change long-term urinary catheters. In catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), urinary
catheter colonization with bacteria is inevitable and hard to eradicate. Replacement of urinary catheters
whilst on antibiotic treatment is advisable.
5	 Presentation with recurrent symptoms within a few weeks of treatment should have further evaluation for
complicated UTI:
•	 Have they had renal/urinary tract imaging?
•	 Repeat a urine culture for resistant bacteria.
•	 Consider performing urodynamics. Is there bladder dysfunction or incomplete emptying or uterine
prolapse/cystocele.
•	 Consider referral to urologist for cystoscopy.
•	 Post menopausal woman – atrophic vulvitis? Consider oestrogen topical therapy and referral for urodynamics.
Table 72.7  Indications for referral to urology.
Urgent
Septic shock with associated ureteric obstruction/hydronephrosis with suspicion or pyonephrosis
Fever and features of renal colic
As soon as possible
Hydronephrosis/ureteric obstruction on imaging +/− AKI OR persisting fever after 72 h on appropriate antibiotic therapy
Renal abscess detected on renal tract imaging
Emphysematous cystitis or pyelonephritis detected on imaging
Non-obstructing stones found on imaging
Acute on chronic retention requiring catheterization
Routine follow-up through clinic
Unexplained recurrent urinary tract infection
Recurrent urinary tract infections in children
Appendix 72.1  Causative agents of urinary tract infection (UTI) and urethritis.
Organism
Comment
Typical
Escherischia coli
Responsible for >80% of urinary tract infections. Increasing resistance amongst
urinary isolates both in hospital acquired UTI and community settings since 2000.
Klebsiella species
As with E coli increasingly resistant isolates seen in UTI.
Proteus species
Often associated with stone formation and therefore indication for renal tract
imaging. Intrinsically resistant to nitrofurantoin.
Staphylococcus saphrophyticus
Common cause of UTI in young women.
Less common
Other enterobacteriacae
(Enterobacter spp, Serratia spp,
Citrobacter spp) Enterococcus spp
More common in health-care associated infection. Typically more resistant to
standard antibiotics. Often harbour ESBLs (extended spectrum beta lactamases)
conferring resistance to penicillins and third-generation cephalosporins.
Unusual
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Unusual community pathogen. More commonly seen in CAUTIs, history of renal
tract intervention, renal stones or health-care exposure.
Candida
When seen in culture often reflects perineal organisms or genital mucosal
candidiasis as a cause of dysuria as opposed to true UTI. However, can (rarely) be
isolated as a genuine urinary pathogen, and isolation in true UTI would be an
indication for renal tract imaging to exclude micro-abscesses or Candida balls.
Staphylococcus aureus
Atypical urinary pathogen outside the setting of urinary tract instrumentation.
Bacteriuria can be seen in the setting of S. aureus bacteraemia from a non-urinary
focus and UTI should not automatically be attributed as primary focus. Blood
cultures are indicated.

<!-- page:532 -->
Urinary tract infection
513
Further reading
MHRA Fluoroquinolone adverse effects. https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/fluoroquinolone-
antibiotics-must-now-only-be-prescribed-when-other-commonly-recommended-antibiotics-are-
inappropriate.
Hooton TM. (2012) Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med 366, 1028–1037.
NICE. (2012) How to monitor aminoglycosides (nomograms). BMJ 345, e6354. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e6354.
NICE guidelines: NG109-113. https://www.nice.org.uk/.
Shaeffer AJ, Nicolle LE. (2016) Urinary tract infections in older men. N Engl J Med 374, 562–571.
