# CHAPTER 75 Fever on return from abroad

- Pages: 549-556
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:549 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
530
The management of the patient with a febrile illness within two months of travel abroad is summarized in
Figure 75.1. See Box 75.1 for sources of advice on the diagnosis and management of infectious diseases
acquired abroad.
•	 Malaria must be excluded if there has been travel through an endemic area (most of Africa, Asia, Central
and South America). Malaria is the most common single cause of fever requiring admission to hospital
after travel to the tropics, accounting for 40–60% of cases from sub-Saharan and West Africa and about
10% from Southeast Asia. Its clinical features are non-specific, and diagnosis requires examination of
blood films for parasites, supplemented by rapid diagnostic tests and/or polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Chemoprophylaxis against malaria does not ensure full protection and may prolong the incubation period.
•	 Other common causes of fever in travellers include respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. Arboviruses
such as dengue, chikungunya and Zika virus infections are widespread, and enteric fevers (typhoid and
paratyphoid) are common, particularly in Asia and the Indian subcontinent. Tick typhus is common in visitors
to Africa.
•	 For travellers who have returned within 21 days from rural west Africa and central Eurasia (especially
Afghanistan and rural Pakistan), a viral haemorrhagic fever must be considered. Isolate the patient and
follow local and national protocols for investigation. Seek advice from local infection and public health
specialists and consult the national Imported Fever Service in the United Kingdom.
•	 Consider other causes of febrile illness unrelated to travel, such as influenza, prevailing respiratory infections
such as COVID-19, community-acquired pneumonia (Chapter 25) and urinary tract infection (Chapter 72).
Priorities
•	 Admit to a single room and nurse with standard isolation technique until the diagnosis is established.
•	 The focused assessment of the patient with fever on return from abroad is given in Table 75.1, and typical
incubation periods for selected tropical infections are in Table 75.2.
•	 Investigations needed urgently are given in Table 75.3.
•	 Clinical features of malaria and enteric fever are summarized in Tables 75.4 and 75.5.
Further management
This will depend on the clinical syndrome and likely pathogens.
Fever on return from abroad
Nick Beeching, Mike Beadsworth, and Steve Woolley
CHAPTER 75

<!-- page:550 -->
Fever on return from abroad
531
Febrile illness within 2 months of travel abroad
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment (Tables 75.1 and 75.2)
If patient has traveled to rural West Africa or central Eurasia (especially
Afghanistan and rural Pakistan) in previous 3 weeks, consider viral haemorrhagic
fever
Seek urgent medical advice from infectious disease physician, before blood
samples are taken
Urgent investigation (Table 75.3)
Severe sepsis/septic shock?
Yes
Manage along standard lines (Chapter 5).
Consider covering falciparum malaria
(Tables 75.4 and 75.6) and typhoid
(Table 75.5) if travel to/through endemic
areas.
No
Yes
No
Suspected meningitis?
Manage along standard lines (Chapter 68)
Consider covering falciparum malaria
(Table 75.4, Table 75.6) if travel
through/to endemic areas
Admit to single room
Nurse with standard isolation
technique until diagnosis
established
Figure 75.1  Management of the patient with a febrile illness within two months of travel abroad.
Imported Fever Service: 24-h advice on clinical management, diagnostic tests and public health aspects
of imported infection. Call the service on 0844 778 8990 after first obtaining advice from local infection specialists (infectious diseases or microbiology). Provides all VHF screening for England and Wales
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/imported-fever-service-ifs
National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC): detailed pre-travel advice and frequent
intelligence reports on outbreaks overseas that may be imported to the United Kingdom http://
travelhealthpro.org.uk/
Malaria Guidelines: UK Government website providing access to current UK standards of diagnosis,
treatment and prevention of malaria https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/malaria-guidance-
data-and-analysis
British Infection Association: publishes numerous guidelines on infection, including imported
diseases, with free access to these from https://www.britishinfection.org/guidance/published-guidelines
Box 75.1  Advice on management of infectious diseases acquired abroad.

<!-- page:551 -->
532
Acute Medicine
Septic shock
•	 Initial antimicrobial therapy for patients from endemic regions may need to cover falciparum malaria
(Tables  75.4 and  75.6) and enteric fever (Table  75.5). Typhoid, paratyphoid and many other bacterial
infections acquired in the tropics are increasingly resistant to many antimicrobials, particularly if the
traveller has been in the Middle East or Asia and/or in contact with healthcare settings while travelling.
Fluoroquinolone resistance is common in Gram-negative organisms and resistance to cephalosporins and
carbapenems is rapidly increasing, so local sepsis treatment policies may not be appropriate and infection
specialists should be consulted to advise on empirical treatment until results of cultures and sensitivity
patterns become available.
Table 75.1  Focused assessment of the patient with a febrile illness after travel abroad.
History
Which countries travelled to and through? Travel in urban or rural areas or both? Precise localities and dates essential.
Immunizations before travel
Malaria prophylaxis taken as prescribed? Insect bite avoidance measures taken?
When did symptoms first appear (Table 75.2)?
Treatments taken?
Known or possible occupational or recreational exposure to infection (including sexually transmitted diseases)?
Exposure
Potential infection or disease
Raw or undercooked foods
Enteric infections, hepatitis A and E, trichinosis
Drinking untreated water; milk,
cheese
Gastroenteritis, enteric fever, hepatitis A and E, brucellosis, tularaemia
Freshwater swimming
Schistosomiasis, leptospirosis
Sexual contact
HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B, gonococcaemia, mpox
Insect bites
Malaria, chikungunya, dengue and Zika (mosquitoes); tick typhus, CrimeanCongo haemorrhagic fever, borreliosis, tularaemia (ticks); scrub typhus (mites);
Chagas’ disease (triatomine bugs); African trypanosomiasis (tse tse flies)
Animal exposure or bites
Rabies, brucellosis, Q fever, tularaemia, borreliosis, viral haemorrhagic fevers,
plague, MERS CoV
Exposure to infected persons
Influenza, measles, viral hepatitis, viral haemorrhagic fevers, meningococcaemia,
mpox
Examination Sign
Potential infection or disease
Rash
Chikungunya, dengue and Zika virus, typhoid, tick-borne, endemic or scrub
typhus, syphilis, gonorrhoea, measles, viral haemorrhagic fever, mpox
Jaundice
Hepatitis A, B and E (patients usually afebrile when jaundice appears), malaria,
yellow fever, leptospirosis, relapsing fever, cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr
virus infection
Lymphadenopathy
Rickettsial infections, brucellosis, dengue fever, HIV, tuberculosis, visceral
leishmaniasis, toxoplasmosis, EBV infection
Hepatomegaly
Amoebiasis, malaria, typhoid, hepatitis, leptospirosis, most arboviruses
Splenomegaly
Malaria, relapsing fever, trypanosomiasis, typhoid, brucellosis, kala-azar,
typhus, chikungunya, dengue and Zika
Eschar (crusted ulcer with black
centre and erythematous margin)
Typhus (tick-borne or scrub), borreliosis, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever,
cutaneous anthrax (relatively painless oedema as well)
Haemorrhage
Severe dengue; meningococcaemia; epidemic louse-borne typhus; Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, viral haemorrhagic fevers

<!-- page:552 -->
Fever on return from abroad
533
Table 75.2  Indicative incubation periods for selected tropical infections.
Short (<10 days)
Arboviral infections (including chikungunya, dengue and Zika virus)
Enteric bacterial infections
Malaria (minimum six days)
Plague
Scrub typhus, Q fever, spotted fever group, for example tick typhus (louse-borne and flea-borne)
Typhoid and paratyphoid
Viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF) (Lassa, Marburg, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, Ebola, Rift Valley)
Medium (10–21 days)
African trypanosomiasis
Brucellosis
Leptospirosis
Malaria
Scrub typhus, Q fever, spotted fever group, for example tick typhus
Typhoid and paratyphoid
Long (>21 days)
Amoebic liver abscess
Filariasis
HIV
Malaria
Schistosomiasis (Katayama fever)
Tuberculosis
Viral hepatitis
Visceral leishmaniasis
Table 75.3  Urgent investigation of the patient with a febrile illness after travel abroad.
Full blood count and differential white count
Blood films and rapid diagnostic tests for malarial parasites if travel to or through an endemic area; the intensity of the
parasitaemia is variable in malaria. If the diagnosis is suspected but the film and rapid diagnostic test (RDT) or PCR are
negative, repeat blood films three times over 24–48 h
Blood culture × 2
C-reactive protein
Blood glucose
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests
Throat swab
Urine stick test, microscopy and culture
Stool microscopy and culture
Serology as appropriate, for example for suspected viral hepatitis, Legionella pneumonia, typhoid, amoebic liver
abscess, leptospirosis (save serum initially if diagnosis uncertain)
Chest X-ray and ultrasound liver if clinical suspicion
Lumbar puncture if neck stiffness present (preceded by CT only if indicated) (Chapter 73)

<!-- page:553 -->
534
Acute Medicine
Table 75.4  Falciparum malaria.
Element
Comment
Clinical features
Prodromal symptoms of malaise, headache, myalgia, anorexia and mild fever
Paroxysms of fever lasting 8–12 h but classical cyclical fever patterns rarely present in early infection
Dry cough, abdominal discomfort, diarrhoea and vomiting common
Moderate tender hepatosplenomegaly (without lymphadenopathy)
Jaundice may occur
Cerebral malaria
Reduced conscious level
Focal or generalized fits
Abnormal neurological signs may be present (including opisthotonos, extensor posturing of
decorticate or decerebrate pattern, sustained posturing of limbs, conjugate deviation of the eyes,
nystagmus, dysconjugate eye movements, bruxism, extensor plantar responses and generalized
flaccidity)
Retinal haemorrhages common (papilloedema may be present but is unusual)
Abnormal patterns of breathing common (including irregular periods of apnoea and
hyperventilation). Tachypnoea may be due to acidosis or adult respiratory distress syndrome
Blood results
Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Low pH, raised lactate
Haemolysis and anaemia
Hypoxaemia
Hypoglycaemia
Renal failure
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Abnormal transaminases
Hyperbilirubinaemia and sometimes hyperbilirubinuria
Diagnosis
Microscopy of Giemsa-stained thick and thin blood films and rapid diagnostic tests (RDT and/or
PCR) for malaria. RDT, PCR and thick films are more sensitive for detection of malaria and the thin
film allows species identification and quantification of the percentage of parasitized red cells
Treatment
Supportive management as for severe sepsis; early admission to high dependency or intensive care
facility.
Chemotherapy: see Table 75.6
Seek advice from an infectious disease or tropical physician
Management of
complications
See Table 75.7
Table 75.5  Enteric fever (typhoid and paratyphoid).
Element
Comment
Clinical
features
Insidious onset with malaise, headache, myalgia, dry cough, anorexia and fever
Abdominal pain, distension and tenderness
Sustained high fever
Diarrhoea early and late, constipation in mid course of illness. Ileal perforation (due to necrosis of
Peyer patch in bowel wall) resulting in peritonitis in ∼2%
Gastrointestinal bleeding (due to erosion of Peyer patch into vessel) in ∼15%
Encephalopathy in ∼10%
Liver and spleen often palpable after the first week
Erythematous macular rash (rose spots) on upper abdomen and anterior chest (may occur during
the second week) in ∼25%

<!-- page:554 -->
Fever on return from abroad
535
Table 75.6  Chemotherapy of falciparum malaria.
Patient seriously ill or unable to take tablets
IV artesunate is treatment of choice, but if not immediately available start with IV quinine. There is no added benefit
from giving both agents, but the WHO suggests giving both if there is concern about delayed blood film clearance with
artemisinin alone.
Artesunate regimen: 2.4 mg/kg given as an intravenous injection at 0, 12 and 24 h, then daily thereafter. After
completion of a minimum of 24 h therapy (maximum five days), a full course of an oral ACT should be taken when the
patient can tolerate oral medication.
All patients receiving artesunate or ACT in hospital should have a follow-up full blood count two weeks later for
possible anaemia.
OR
IV quinine: loading dose of 20 mg/kg quinine dihydrochloride in 5% dextrose or dextrose saline over 4 h (usual maximum
dose 1.4 g), followed by 10 mg/kg (usual maximum 700 mg) every 8 h for first 48 h (or until patient can swallow).
Frequency of dosing should be reduced to 12 hourly if intravenous quinine continues for more than 48 h. Omit high
loading dose if quinine, quinidine or mefloquine is given within the previous 12 h.
Parenteral quinine therapy should be continued until the patient can take oral therapy, when quinine
sulphate 600 mg should be given three times a day to complete five to seven days of quinine in total.
Quinine treatment should always be accompanied by a second drug: doxycycline 200 mg daily (or clindamycin 450 mg
three times a day for children or pregnant women), given orally for total of seven days from when the patient can swallow.
Patient not seriously ill and able to swallow tablets
Artemether with lumefantrine (Riamet): if weight is over 35 kg, give four tablets initially, followed by five further doses
of four tablets at 8, 24, 36, 48 and 60 h (total 24 tablets over 60 h).
or
Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PPQ) is another co-artem combination that may be used: if 36–60 kg, 3 tablets
daily for 3 days; if >60 kg 4 tablets daily for 3 days. See product literature cautions, especially in patients with cardiac
conditions and/or taking agents that prolong QT interval.
or
Atovaquone with proguanil (Malarone) four tablets once daily for three days.
or
Quinine 600 mg of quinine salt 8-hourly PO for 5–7 days, PLUS doxycycline 200 mg daily PO (or clindamycin 450 mg
8-hourly) for 7 days (start these as soon as possible with the quinine).
It is not necessary to give doxycycline or clindamycin with or after treatment with agents other than quinine.
Source: see guidelines in Further References and British National Formulary.
Element
Comment
Blood results
Raised white cell count
Mild thrombocytopenia
Abnormal liver function tests
Diagnosis
Blood culture positive in 40–80%
Stool and urine culture positive after the first week
Laboratory should test isolates for fluoroquinolone resistance (common)
Treatment
Supportive management as for severe sepsis
Antibiotic therapy with azithromycin or ceftriaxone
Table 75.5  (Continued )

<!-- page:555 -->
536
Acute Medicine
•	 Empirical treatment for suspected enteric fever or gastroenteritis severe enough to merit antimicrobials is
currently with azithromycin or ceftriaxone for severe enteric fever.
•	 Patients with severe falciparum malaria and hypotension should also receive antimicrobial therapy to cover
Gram-negative infection, as mixed infections may occur. See Chapter 5 for the management of sepsis and
septic shock.
•	 If malaria has been excluded and leptospirosis and/or rickettsial infection are possible diagnoses, doxycycline
should be included early in empirical therapy.
Chest X-ray shadowing
Consider pulmonary tuberculosis, COVID-19, SARS, MERS CoV, and Legionnaires’ disease, in addition to the
common causes of community-acquired pneumonia (Chapter 25).
Meningism
•	 See Chapter 73 for the management of suspected bacterial meningitis and encephalitis.
•	 Perform a lumbar puncture, preceded by CT only if indicated.
•	 If the CSF shows no organisms but a high lymphocyte count, consider tuberculous meningitis (Appendix 73.1),
leptospirosis or brucellosis.
•	 If there are other features suggesting leptospirosis (haemorrhagic rash, conjunctivitis, renal failure and
jaundice), give ceftriaxone, benzyl penicillin or doxycycline.
Table 75.7  Management of complications of falciparum malaria.
Complication
Management
Hypotension
Transfer to high dependency unit
Give IV fluids (weight based) to maintain blood pressure but caution against fluid overload.
Maintain adequate oxygenation
Start inotropic vasopressor therapy if systolic BP remains <90 mmHg despite fluids (Chapter 2)
Start antibiotic therapy for possible coexistent Gram-negative sepsis after taking blood
cultures (Chapter 5)
Hypoglycaemia
This is a common complication
Blood glucose should be checked 4-hourly, or 2-hourly while on IV quinine, or whenever
conscious level deteriorates or if seizures occur
If blood glucose is <4 mmol/L, give 100 mL of glucose 20% IV and start an IV infusion of
glucose 10% (initially 1 L 12-hourly) via a large peripheral or central vein
Seizures
Recheck blood glucose
Manage along standard lines (Chapter 57)
Exclude coexistent bacterial meningitis by CSF examination (NB lumbar puncture should not
be done within 1 h of a major seizure)
Pulmonary oedema
May occur from excessive IV fluid or ARDS
Manage along standard lines (Chapter 14)
Renal failure and
acidosis
Haemofiltration may be needed for renal failure or control of acidosis or fluid/electrolyte
imbalance
Anaemia and
thrombocytopenia
Both improve after several days of malaria chemotherapy. Anaemia is haemolytic and
transfusion is only required for severe symptomatic anaemia. Thrombocytopenia is common
and may be profound but platelet transfusions are not usually indicated
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.

<!-- page:556 -->
Fever on return from abroad
537
Jaundice
•	 See Chapter 35 for the assessment of the patient with acute jaundice.
•	 Always consider falciparum malaria. Others causes are viral hepatitis A, B and E (but with these infections
patients are usually afebrile when jaundice appears), leptospirosis, cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus
infection, in addition to non-infectious causes, including drug and alcohol toxicity.
Diarrhoea
•	 See Chapter 34 for the management of the patient with acute diarrhoea.
•	 Causes to consider following recent travel abroad are given in Table 34.5.
Eosinophilia
The presence of eosinophilia in association with fever in returned travellers usually indicates an invasive
helminth infection, but exclude other causes, especially atopy and drug reactions. Causes include filariasis
(clues nocturnal or diurnal fever pattern); early phase of strongyloides and hookworm infections
(abdominal  pain and diarrhoea); hookworm and roundworm pneumonitis (cough and wheeze); early
schistosomiasis (freshwater exposure especially in Africa/Middle East, urticarial rash, wheeze and altered
semen); and loiasis (travel to Africa, transient peripheral skin swellings). Seek expert advice on special
investigations needed.
Further reading
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Traveler’s health. https://www.cdc.gov/.
Eckerle I, Briciu VT, Ergönül Ö, et al. (2018) Emerging souvenirs – clinical presentation of the returning
traveller with imported arbovirus infections in Europe. Clin Microbiol Infect 24, 240–245.
Fink D, Wano RD, Johnston V. (2018) Fever in the returning traveller. BMJ 360, 158–161.
Johnston V, Stockley JM, Dockrell D, et al. (2009) Fever in returned travellers presenting in the United
Kingdom: recommendations for investigation and initial management. J Infect 59, 1–18.
Lalloo DG, Shingadia D, Bell DJ, et al. (2016) UK malaria treatment guidelines. J Infect 72, 635–649.
Nabarro LE, McCann N, Herdman MT, et al. (2022) British Infection Association guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of enteric fever in England. J Infect 84, 469–489.
Thakker C, Warrell C, Barrett J, et al. (2024) UK guidelines for the investigation and management of
eosinophilia in returning travellers and migrants. J Infect, on-line ahead of print, article 106328.
Thwaites GE, Day NP. (2017) Approach to fever in the returning traveler. N Engl J Med 376, 548–560.
