# CHAPTER 76 Pyrexia of unknown origin

- Pages: 557-560
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:557 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
538
Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) was defined over 60 years ago as an illness lasting for three weeks or more,
with fever greater than 38.3 °C (101 °F) on several occasions, the cause of which remained uncertain after a
week of investigation in hospital. The investigation period has been reduced to three days in hospital or 3 clinic
appointments. Subgroups have been suggested according to patient status or situation, including nosocomial,
neutropenic, HIV-related and children or seniors (65 or over). Over 200 causes of PUO have been described,
broadly categorized as infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic or miscellaneous (Tables 76.1 and 76.2). The prominence of each aetiological category varies with host status, geography, and access to sophisticated investigations; no cause is found in 25–50% of cases despite extensive investigation.
A structured, stepwise approach to diagnosis is mandatory. Patients should be involved early in related
decision-making so that they understand that this aims to minimise unnecessary investigations and reduce the
likelihood of following diagnostic ‘red herrings’. A thorough history and physical examination should be
repeated at regular intervals. Irrespective of age, the history should include possible occupational, recreational
or other exposures to potential pathogens, animals and toxins; illness in family or contacts; sexual history; and
health care contacts (operations, IV lines etc) in the preceding 6 months. A detailed drug history should cover
prescribed and over the counter medications, traditional and ‘natural’ remedies and recreational drugs. A full
travel history should be obtained (see Chapter 75).
A detailed multi-system examination should cover often neglected areas such as the ears, throat, mouth
including dentition, temporal arteries and fundoscopy. It is important to exclude back tenderness and to consider pelvic and rectal examinations including the prostate in men. If the patient has implanted material such
as prosthetic joints, pacemakers, in-dwelling vascular devices, shunts, grafts or meshes, possible implant
infection should be considered. Body temperature should be measured and recorded by health care workers
rather than by the patient, using the same method each time.
All patients should have a standard set of basic investigations, some of which might be repeated to observe
trends (Table 76.3). In addition, focal symptoms and/or physical signs may provide clues to prompt focussed
organ- or system-oriented investigations. These can broadly be aimed at detection of infection (Table 76.4) or
other causes (Table 76.5). If this first round of investigation yields a likely cause, this can be investigated and
managed in detail.
However, if there is no obvious focus or cause identified after reviewing the above and repeated history
taking and physical examination, whole body imaging should be considered. Over the past decade
2-deoxy-2-18F-fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography with CT (PET-CT) scans have become
more accessible. These have better positive and negative diagnostic yields than most other scan combinations
to identify physical targets for further investigation by e.g. biopsy, or generalized conditions such as large vessel inflammation. Early use of PET-CT, rather than delaying it until after whole body CT with contrast, is likely
to reduce the length of hospital stay and/or number of clinic visits, the number of investigations and the
Pyrexia of unknown origin
Stephen Woolley, Mike Beadsworth, and Nick Beeching
CHAPTER 76

<!-- page:558 -->
Pyrexia of unknown origin
539
Table 76.2  Non-infective causes of PUO in alphabetical order within each category.
Rheumatological/Inflammatory
Behçet’s disease
Familial Mediterranean fever
Felty’s syndrome
Giant cell arteritis and temporal arteritis
Gout and pseudogout
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polymyositis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Sarcoidosis
Still’s disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Takayasu’s arteritis
Solid Organ Malignancies
Atrial myxoma
Colonic cancer
Hepatic carcinoma
Metastatic disease
Pancreatic cancer
Renal cell carcinoma
Haematological malignancies
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Myeloproliferative disorders
Miscellaneous
Drug fever
Factitious fever
Hypoadrenalism
Hypothalamic dysfunction
Inflammatory bowel disease
Thyroiditis
Table 76.1  Infective causes of PUO in alphabetical order within each category.
Immunocompetent
Immunocompromised
Atypical bacterial infections such as bartonellosis,
brucellosis, Q fever
Infective endocarditis
Discitis
Infected implantable devices/prosthetic material
Malaria
Occult abscesses
Osteomyelitis
Prostatitis
Syphilis
Tuberculosis
Viral e.g. prolonged primary CMV
•	 Bacterial including non-typhoidal salmonellosis, melioidosis,
syphilis, non-tuberculous mycobacteria, tuberculosis.
•	 Viral- arboviruses, CMV, EBV, HIV seroconversion, parvovirus.
•	 Fungal- aspergillosis, candidiasis, cryptococcosis, endemic
dimorphic mycoses and histoplasmosis.
•	 Parasitic- visceral leishmaniasis
•	 Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndromes (IRIS).
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.

<!-- page:559 -->
540
Acute Medicine
amount of radiation exposure for patients. Disadvantages include the need for pre imaging fasting, loss of
diagnostic sensitivity if the patient is taking steroids, and inequity of access to scans in different hospitals
or regions.
If the above sequence does not provide an obvious cause, a pause for observation is usually appropriate.
Revisit the history often and rule out factitious (self-induced) fever and drug induced fever. Drug-fever typically
starts 7–10 days after commencing a new therapeutic. It is unlikely to be a cause if the fever persists 96-hours
after stopping the drug; typical culprits include antimicrobials, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, antiarrhythmics, anti-convulsants and anti-depressants. If no diagnosis can be made, the patient can be reassured
that the outcome is likely to be benign, even if minor symptoms persist for some months. Patients with a
normal PET-CT are six times more likely to have a benign outcome.
Avoid the temptation to prescribe empirical antimicrobials, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories or steroids unless
there is a strong suspicion of immediate threat to life by conditions such as large vessel vasculitis, miliary tuberculosis, infective endocarditis or sepsis. Common pitfalls and good practice points are summarised in Table 76.6.
Table 76.3  Baseline investigations for PUO in all patients.
Urinalysis (and culture if any abnormality)
Full blood count with white cell differential
C-reactive protein (CRP)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Serum biochemistry: renal, liver and bone profiles, creatinine kinase
Serum ferritin
Chest imaging (CXR or CT)
Ultrasound of abdomen
At least 2 peripheral blood cultures
HIV test
Tuberculin test or IGRA
Table 76.4  Second line investigations for possible infective aetiology.
Infective cause diagnostics
Microbiology
Radiology/other imaging modalities
Blood cultures (including paired peripheral and line cultures if an
intravascular device is in situ)
Lumbar puncture- opening pressure, CSF protein, CSF glucose [paired with
serum], CSF lactate, microbiological culture and virology PCRs
Malaria screen (RDT and 3 malaria films over 3 consecutive days and if
negative consider malaria PCR)
Lymph node biopsy (culture including mycobacterial culture and histology)
Serology and molecular tests dependent on risk factors and travel history- all
should have HIV serology, consider HBV and HCV
Sputum for culture- fungal, mycobacterial and virology testing as required
Stool samples for culture, PCR and OCP
Urine culture +/− 3 consecutive early morning urines to exclude tuberculosis
Wound cultures
CT-neck/thorax/abdomen and pelvis
Echocardiogram including TOE
MRI head and/or spine
OGD +/− biopsies
PET-CT
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OCP, ova, cysts and parasites;
OGD, oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy; PCR-polymerase chain reaction; PET-CT, positron emission
tomography-computed tomography; RDT, rapid detection test; TOE, transoesophageal echocardiogram.

<!-- page:560 -->
Pyrexia of unknown origin
541
Further reading
Fernandez C, Beeching NJ. (2018) Pyrexia of unknown origin. Clin Med (Lond) 18(2), 170–174.
Haidar G, Singh N. (2022) Fever of unknown origin. NEJM 386(5), 463–477.
Wright WF, Kandish S, Brady R, et al. (2024) Nuclear medicine imaging tools in fever of unknown origin: time
for a revisit and appropriate use criteria. Clin Infect Dis 78, 1148–1153.
Yates GP, Feldman MD. (2016) Factitious disorder: a systematic review of 455 cases in the professional
literature. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 41, 20–28.
Table 76.5  Second line investigations for possible non-infective aetiology.
Non-infective causes
Rheumatological/Inflammatory/Other
Neoplastic/Other
Antibodies- ANA (+/− anti-Ro/La/Sm, dsDNA, histone, SCL-70, centromere),
ACA, ANCA, anti-CCP, autoimmune thyroid antibodies (thyroglobulin,
peroxidase, TSH-receptor stimulating Ab), rheumatoid factor
Biochemistry- complement C3/C4 levels, cryoglobulins, ferritin,
immunoglobulins, joint aspiration for crystals, LDH, pituitary screen, serum
ACE, serum electrophoresis, serum urate, synacthen test, thyroid function
tests, urine for BJP
Histology- temporal artery biopsy
Radiology- angiography (CT or MRI), CT-neck/thorax/abdomen/pelvis, CT-PET
Biochemistry- calcium, electrophoresis,
LDH, urine for BJP
Histology- bone marrow trephine,
lymph node tissue
Imaging- colonoscopy, CT-neck/
thorax/abdomen/pelvis,
echocardiogram, OGD, PET/CT
ACA, anti-cardiolipin antibody; ACE, angiotensin converting-enzyme; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody; BJP, Bence-Jones protein; CCP, cyclic citrullinated peptide; CT, computed tomography; dsDNA,
double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid; LDH, lactose dehydrogenate; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OGD,
oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy; PET-CT, positron emission tomography-computed tomography; TSH, thyroidstimulating hormone.
Table 76.6  Common pitfalls and good practice points.
Take an adequate history and examine the patient fully.
Return to the patient’s history and examination at regular intervals.
Consider non-infectious causes of fever early in the patient’s journey.
Consider:
•	 discitis in a patient with back pain/tenderness
•	 empyema in slowly resolving pneumonia
•	 peritonitis in a patient with ascites
•	 tuberculosis in a patient with sterile pyuria
•	 endocarditis in patients with ‘skin commensals’ in blood cultures (including coagulase negative staphylococci)
•	 chronic prostatitis in men with lower urinary tract symptoms
All patients should have an HIV test.
Do not perform multiple serological testing if there is no history of exposure to the pathogen you are testing for, or
other related diagnostic clues.
Malaria can present up to 2 years after leaving an endemic area.
Tuberculin skin test and TB IGRA tests are often negative in disseminated mycobacterial disease. A negative result does
not rule out the diagnosis; a positive test is not diagnostic for TB – microbiological confirmation is required.
Avoid inappropriately enthusiastic investigation. Treat the individual rather than the symptoms.
Avoid early initiation of empirical antimicrobials or steroids.
Look for a further diagnosis if fever persists after treatment for the first diagnosis considered.
