# CHAPTER 77 HIV infection

- Pages: 561-567
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:561 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
542
People living with human immunodeficiency virus (PLHIV) get common diseases as well as those that reflect
their immune deficiency. The spectrum of HIV infection is summarized in Box 77.1.
HIV infection
Mas Chaponda and Nick Beeching
CHAPTER 77
Group 1  Acute infection or primary HIV infection (a mononucleosis-like syndrome associated with
sero-conversion)
Group 2  Asymptomatic infection
Group 3  Symptomatic disease
Group 4  Advanced disease: CD4 + T cell count <200 × 106/L
Constitutional disease (e.g. fever, weight loss, diarrhoea)
Neurological disease (HIV encephalopathy, progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy)
Other conditions (thrombocytopenia, non-specific interstitial pneumonitis)
Opportunistic infections:
•	 Pneumocystis: pneumonia
•	 Cytomegalovirus: chorioretinitis, colitis, pneumonitis or oesophagitis
•	 Candida albicans: oral thrush, oesophagitis
•	 Mycobacterium avium complex: localized or disseminated infection
•	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis: infection
•	 Cryptococcus neoformans: meningitis or disseminated infection
•	 Toxoplasma gondii: encephalitis or intracerebral mass lesions
•	 Herpes simplex virus: severe mucocutaneous lesions, oesophagitis
•	 Cryptosporidium spp.: diarrhoea
•	 Cystoisospora belli: diarrhoea
•	 EBV: oral hairy leukoplakia
Neoplasms:
•	 Kaposi’s sarcoma (cutaneous and visceral)
•	 Lymphoma (brain, bone marrow, primary effusion lung and gut).
Box 77.1  Spectrum of HIV infection.

<!-- page:562 -->
HIV infection
543
•	 Establish from the patient who else knows about the HIV diagnosis among the patient’s relatives and friends:
be sensitive to their needs and respect the patient’s right to confidentiality.
•	 Take appropriate safety precautions when handling body fluids and label specimens according to local
policies.
•	 The management of acute medical problems in the patient with HIV/AIDS is often complex, and you should
seek advice from an infectious disease (ID) physician early on.
Breathlessness
Pulmonary infection (especially Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia) remains the most common acute presentation in HIV-positive patients. Other causes to consider are given in Table 77.1. Management is summarized in
Figure 77.1.
1	 Attach a pulse oximeter and check arterial blood gases: the patient may be severely hypoxaemic with minimal lung signs. Give oxygen to maintain arterial oxygen saturation >90%. Investigations needed urgently
are given in Table 77.2.
2	 Your clinical assessment and the chest X-ray appearance may provide clues to the likely diagnosis
(Table 77.3).
•	 Dual pathology is relatively frequent, and definitive diagnosis depends on microbiological findings.
•	 A high-resolution CT of the thorax may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis.
•	 Examination of induced sputum and/or bronchoscopic alveolar lavage fluid is often helpful in making a
diagnosis.
•	 Initial treatment for suspected P. jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is given in Table 77.4.
•	 Seek advice from a chest physician and ID physician on further management.
Neuro-ophthalmic problems
With improved PCP prophylaxis, HIV-positive patients are presenting more frequently with neuro-ophthalmic
problems (Table 77.5).
Table 77.1  Respiratory symptoms in the HIV-positive patient.
CD4 T cell count (×106/L)
>500
200–500
<200
Usual causes
Usual causes especially
pneumococcal pneumonia
Usual causes
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection
M. tuberculosis infection
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
M. tuberculosis infection
Mycobacterium avium complex infection
Cytomegalovirus pneumonitis
Fungal pneumonia
Kaposi’s sarcoma

<!-- page:563 -->
544
Acute Medicine
HIV-positive patient with respiratory symptoms
Seek advice from
chest/infectious
diseases physician
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment (Tables 77.1 and 77.3)
Urgent investigation (Table 77.2)
Chest X-ray
Normal
Sputum examination
Abnormal
Sputum examination
No sputum/pathogen
not identiﬁed
Further investigation for
Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia: CT, examination
of induced sputum;
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
Positive
Negative
Observation
Pathogen
identiﬁed
Treat
Treat
No sputum/pathogen
not identiﬁed
Treat likely
diagnosis
(Table 77.4)
Figure 77.1  Assessment and management of the HIV-positive patient with respiratory symptoms.
Table 77.2  Urgent investigation of the HIV-positive patient with respiratory symptoms.
Chest X-ray
Arterial blood gases and pH and lactate
Full blood count and differential white count
CD4 T cell count and HIV viral load
Blood culture (positive in most patients with M. avium complex infection: use specific mycobacterial culture bottles)
Blood G6PD level
Sodium and potassium, urea and creatinine
Liver function tests
Lactate dehydrogenase (raised in P. jirovecii pneumonia and lymphoma)
Expectorated sputum if available for Gram and Ziehl–Neelsen stains, TB PCR and culture
Induced sputum (using hypertonic saline via nebulizer) for staining or PCR for P. jirovecii
and mycobacterial stains and culture
High-resolution CT scan of thorax
Consider fibreoptic bronchoscopy (for bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy)

<!-- page:564 -->
HIV infection
545
Delirium with or without headache
(see also Chapters 53 and 69)
Consider toxoplasmosis, cryptococcal meningitis (Chapter 73), cerebral lymphoma and progressive multifocal
leucoencephalopathy. HIV encephalopathy is diagnosed by exclusion of other causes.
•	 Arrange an urgent CT scan of the brain with contrast or MRI.
•	 Perform a lumbar puncture (LP) if the scan is normal. Send CSF for cell count and differential; protein concentration; glucose (together with blood glucose taken at same time); Gram, Ziehl–Neelsen and India ink
stains; TB PCR, culture and syphilis. Request specific tests for Cryptococcus spp., Toxoplasma gondii and
mycobacteria.
•	 If no specific diagnosis can be made, consider giving empirical treatment for toxoplasmosis with pyrimethamine and sulphadiazine, and repeat the scan after 2–3 weeks.
•	 Seek advice from an ID physician and neurologist.
Table 77.3  Diagnostic clues in the HIV-positive patient with respiratory symptoms.
Diagnosis
Clinical features
Chest X-ray features
Pneumocystis
jirovecii
pneumonia (PCP)
Dyspnoea, often of slow onset
Dry cough
Lungs clear, or sparse basal crackles
Fever
See Table 77.4
Perihilar haze: diffuse bilateral interstitial or alveolar
shadowing
Lobar consolidation rare
Pleural effusion rare
Pneumothorax may occur
See Table 77.4
M. tuberculosis
infection
Cough, fever, haemoptysis, weight
loss, night sweats
More often typical of tuberculosis if CD4 cell count
is >200 × 106/L: multiple areas of consolidation,
often with cavitation, in one or both upper lobes
M. avium complex
infection
Cough, dyspnoea, fever
Often normal, fibro-cavitary or nodular
bronchiectatic changes
Bacterial
pneumonia
(Chapter 25)
Commoner in smokers
Productive cough
Focal signs, fever
Focal consolidation
Cytomegalovirus
pneumonitis
Clinically indistinguishable from PCP
(dual infection may occur)
Diffuse bilateral interstitial shadowing
Fungal pneumonia
Fever, cough, weight loss
Systemic features of fungal infection
may be present (skin lesions,
lymphadenopathy and
hepatosplenomegaly)
Diffuse bilateral interstitial shadowing in ∼50%
Focal shadowing, nodules, cavities, pleural effusion
and hilar adenopathy may be seen
Kaposi’s sarcoma
No fever
Dyspnoea
Diffuse bilateral interstitial shadowing, more
nodular than PCP
May be unilateral and associated with hilar
adenopathy
May be associated with cutaneous
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Pleural effusion strongly suggestive

<!-- page:565 -->
546
Acute Medicine
Focal upper motor neurone signs
•	 Consider toxoplasmosis or lymphoma.
•	 Arrange an urgent cranial CT scan of the brain with contrast or MR scan.
•	 Perform an LP if the scan is normal and send CSF for investigation as above.
Table 77.4  Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP): diagnosis and management.
Element
Comment
Patients at risk
Newly diagnosed HIV infection with advanced disease (CD4 cell count <200 × 106/L)
Patients with previous PCP or CD4 cell count <200 × 106/L, who are not taking prophylaxis
Clinical features
Subacute onset
Fever (∼90%)
Cough (∼95%), usually non-productive
Progressive breathlessness (∼95%)
Tachypnoea (∼60%)
Chest examination normal in ∼50%
Chest X-ray features
Initially normal in up to 25%
Commonest abnormalities are diffuse bilateral interstitial or alveolar shadowing
Lobar consolidation and pleural effusion: rare. Pneumothorax may occur
CT scan features
Extensive ground glass infiltrates. Spontaneous pneumothorax and an upper lobe
distribution of parenchymal opacities
Induced sputum
Staining of induced sputum for P. jirovecii trophic forms and cysts
Specificity ∼100%, sensitivity 50–90%
PCR Sensitivity 98%, specificity 80–98%
Bronchoscopy with
bronchoalveolar lavage
Indicated if PCP or TB is suspected if induced sputum is non-diagnostic or cannot be done
Specificity ∼100%, sensitivity ∼80–90%
Antimicrobial therapy
First choice: co-trimoxazole PO or IV for 21 days. Causes haemolysis in some G6PD-deficient
patients (African/Mediterranean). Other side effects include nausea, vomiting, fever, rash,
marrow suppression and raised transaminases
Alternative regimens: primaquine + clindamycin; atovaquone; pentamidine
Adjuvant steroid therapy
Start immediately if severe PCP (breathless at rest; PaO2 breathing air <8 kPa; extensive
interstitial shadowing on chest X-ray)
Give prednisolone 40 mg twice daily PO for 5 days, followed by prednisolone 40 mg daily PO
for 5 days, then prednisolone 20 mg daily PO for 11 days
Table 77.5  Headache/delirium/focal neurological signs in the HIV-positive patient.
CD4 cell count (×106/L)
>500
200–500
<200
Usual causes (see also
Chapters 53 and 69)
Usual causes
HIV encephalopathy
Tuberculous meningitis (Chapter 73)
Usual causes
Primary CNS lymphoma
Tuberculous meningitis (Chapter 73)
Toxoplasmosis
Cryptococcal meningitis (Chapter 73)
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy

<!-- page:566 -->
HIV infection
547
•	 If focal lesions (ring-enhancing, with surrounding oedema on CT), treat as toxoplasmosis.
•	 Seek advice from an ID physician and neurologist.
•	 Consider stereotactic biopsy.
Impaired vision (see also Chapter 54)
Ophthalmic complications are more likely in advanced HIV and CD4 T cell count <50 × 106/L, particularly cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis and toxoplasmosis. Syphilis and tuberculosis may also affect the eye and can occur
at any CD4 count.
Suspect CMV retinitis: fundoscopy shows characteristic infiltrates, similar in appearance to soft exudates; or
confluent areas of retinal necrosis with haemorrhages in posterior pole (‘pizza’ or ‘cottage cheese with
ketchup’ appearance); or marked vascular sheathing (‘frosted branch angiitis’).
•	 Seek advice from an ophthalmologist.
•	 Treatment is with ganciclovir (or cidofovir or foscarnet if ganciclovir is contraindicated; both are
nephrotoxic). Ganciclovir and its oral form valganciclovir can cause severe marrow depression which
must be monitored.
Acute diarrhoea
See Chapter 34 for the assessment and management of the patient with acute diarrhoea.
Establish the differential diagnosis from the history and examination (Table 34.1). Strict infection control
protocols must be followed (including barrier nursing and handwashing). Investigations needed urgently are
given in Table 34.2.
•	 Features of community-acquired infective diarrhoea are given in Table 34.3 and hospital-acquired diarrhoea
in Table 34.4.
•	 Pathogens to consider in the patient with HIV/AIDS are given in Table 77.6.
•	 Seek advice from an ID physician and gastroenterologist.
Table 77.6  Chronic diarrhoea in the HIV-positive patient: specific pathogens to consider.
Cause
Clinical features
Diagnosis/treatment
Cryptosporidiosis
(Cryptosporidium
species)
Subacute onset
Associated abdominal pain
Severe diarrhoea
Identification of oocysts in stool
Seek expert advice on treatment
Cystoisosporiasis
(Cystoisospora belli)
Incubation period one week
Associated fever, abdominal
pain, diarrhoea with fatty
stools
Identification of oocysts in stool, duodenal aspirate or
jejunal biopsy
Seek expert advice on treatment
Cytomegalovirus
(CMV)
Diarrhoea may be accompanied
by systemic illness and hepatitis
Serology and/or blood PCR for CMV; consider large
bowel endoscopy and biopsy
Seek expert advice on management
Mycobacterium
avium complex
(MAC)
Chronic diarrhoea, abdominal
pain, persistent fever, weight
loss and progressive wasting
Endoscopic biopsy and culture; blood culture also
useful as MAC often grows within 10 days
Seek expert advice on treatment
Source: in addition to other causes: see Chapter 34.

<!-- page:567 -->
548
Acute Medicine
Further reading
British Association for Sexual Health and HIV Guidelines https://www.bashh.org/guidelines
British HIV Association (BHIVA) Guidelines http://www.bhiva.org/guidelines.aspx
European AIDS Clinical Society Guidelines. Version 12 October 2023. www.eacsociety.org/guidelines/
eacs-guidelines/
Maartens G, Celum C, Lewin SR. (2014) HIV infection: epidemiology, pathogenesis, treatment and
prevention. Lancet 384, 258–271.
Panel on Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents
with HIV. Guidelines for the prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections in adults and adolescents
with HIV. National Institutes of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, HIV Medicine
Association, and Infectious Diseases Society of America. https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/
adult-and-adolescent-opportunistic-infection. [updated regularly in real time].
World Health Organization Consolidated guidelines on HIV, viral hepatitis and STI prevention, diagnosis,
treatment and care for key populations. Last Updated: July 2022. https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789240052390.
