# CHAPTER 78 COVID-19 and future pandemics

- Pages: 568-574
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:568 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
549
The management of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) infection, in terms of
intervention, supportive measures and infection control measures has changed hugely since the start of the
coronavirus infectious diseases 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic in December 2019 and continues to change still.
Many of the lessons learnt during the pandemic will be applicable to similar situations in the future.
SARS-CoV2 is a novel coronavirus that causes a spectrum of disease from asymptomatic infection to mild
symptomatic upper respiratory tract infection through to severe inflammatory lung disease (COVID-19).
Estimates for the infection fatality rate vary, but in the setting of a high-income country, such as the United
Kingdom, this was about 1% in an unvaccinated population. The high levels of transmission meant that this
mortality rate translated into large absolute numbers requiring hospital care, either overwhelming or threatening to overwhelm healthcare services. The possibility of healthcare services saturation risked an increase in
preventable mortality and so public health measures were employed to ‘flatten the pandemic curve’.
Throughout the pandemic, there were waves of infection, which appeared to be driven mostly by a change in
the predominant circulating variant. The changes in variant affected transmission rates, severity of disease as well
as the syndrome that people experienced. However, all these were confounded by changes in public health measures and social distancing as well as the fact that progressively more of the population had developed immunity
against the virus either through natural exposure or through immunization, once it become available.
The challenge with writing about SARS-CoV2 management is that it has changed radically and will continue
to do so. Some of the public health and infection prevention and control (IPC) measures were specific to certain
points in the pandemic, driven by transmission rates, healthcare capacity, new variants, seropositivity rates in
the population and immunization roll out.
The next pandemic, when it arrives, will be different. We will need to take the general principles learned
from this pandemic and apply them to the next.
History
History
Detail expansion
Symptoms
See below
Duration of symptoms
Timing of inflammatory deterioration
SARS-CoV2 exposure history
Pre-test likelihood of being positive and therefore cohorting decisions
Vaccination/Previous SARS-CoV2 infection history
Serostatus and the risk of developing inflammation in the lungs
Immunocompromise
Risk of deterioration despite vaccination
Which immunomodulatory treatments may be of benefit
COVID-19 and future pandemics
Robert H. Shaw and Maheshi N. Ramasamy
CHAPTER 78

<!-- page:569 -->
550
Acute Medicine
SARS-CoV2 syndrome
Cardinal symptoms*
Continuous cough, fever and change/reduction in sense of smell/taste (often
in the absence of nasal congestion or rhinorrhoea)
Other associated symptoms and signs
Shortness of breath, fatigue, myalgia, headache, sore throat, nasal
congestion, rhinorrhoea, diarrhoea, nausea, low oxygen saturations
*Different variants appear to have slight differences in prominence of different symptoms and this may further change
in the future.
The illness in an unvaccinated population was frequently biphasic, with the initial illness appearing as an upper
respiratory tract infection that would last a few days, often with near-complete recovery, followed by a respiratory
deterioration 7–10 days after the initial onset of symptoms. This second phase of illness is regarded predominantly to be immune-mediated. During this second phase, there was often disparity between level of hypoxia and
severity of symptoms, with some patients appearing relatively comfortable despite very low oxygen saturations.
It is important to distinguish the COVID-19 syndrome that was frequently observed in the early part of the pandemic (biphasic illness due to SARS-CoV2 infection resulting in bilateral peripheral ground glass changes on radiological imaging with hypoxia) from symptomatic SARS-CoV2 infection in a frail patient with underlying comorbidity.
The former typically occurs in an unvaccinated, infection-naïve population, but it can occur in those vaccinated, if
they have other risk factors such as immunocompromise or increased BMI. The latter is typically a relatively mild
infective syndrome which can significantly destabilise an underlying comorbidity – such as heart failure or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. This can result in severe illness with hospitalization and even death, but the
pathophysiology of SARS-CoV2 infection in the lungs is distinctly different from the COVID-19 syndrome.
Diagnosis
Syndromic
Initially, in the absence of molecular tests, diagnosis was made on epidemiological risk and
symptoms. This was a prudent initial approach, but epidemiological risk by defined exposure quickly
became difficult to judge as virus transmission became widespread and asymptomatic transmission
was recognised. Subsequently, NHS contact-tracing apps gave some limited help in assessing
epidemiological risk, but by this point molecular diagnostics were available. The impact of
contact-tracing on overall national transmission, clinical outcomes and mortality was difficult to
assess due to limited uptake and compliance.
Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)
Although highly sensitive, PCR diagnostic assays pose several issues. Firstly, inadequately
administered tests (either by the patient or healthcare professionals) result in reduced sensitivity.
Secondly, sensitivity is dependent on timing of testing according to the syndrome, with peak
sensitivity occurring with the first phase of illness. Thirdly, viral RNA was discovered, in some cases
to be present for prolonged periods following recovery from infection – up to three months in
some cases. Many PCR platforms had more than one target (e.g. Spike (S), Nucleocapsid (N) and
ORF1). As viral variants emerged, the primers targeting the most mutable proteins (S) were less
effective at binding viral nucleic acid templates, and so automated laboratory diagnosis algorithms
had to change (e.g. ‘S-gene drop-outs’ were used as a correlate to diagnose some new variants).
Whole genome
sequencing (WGS)
An additional molecular diagnostic, where available, which did not suffer from the problems of
mutability of primer target.
Lateral flow antigen
test (LFA)
These were point-of-care tests used for diagnosis. They were commercially available with
differences in sensitivity between brands. Additionally, there appeared to be a loss in sensitivity
against more recent variants. Similar molecular mutation caveats affected LFAs as they did PCR,
although there appeared to be a closer correlation with active viral replication (and therefore an
inference of transmission risk) with a positive LFA than a positive PCR test.
Imaging
Plain film chest radiographs and chest CT/CTPA were the mainstay of radiological diagnosis, but
used alone, are non-specific and lack sensitivity. COVID-19 lung findings included bilateral
peripheral ground glass changes and/or consolidation.

<!-- page:570 -->
COVID-19 and future pandemics
551
Infection prevention and control
In the absence of vaccination and effective treatments, prevention of transmission was of the utmost
importance. SARS-CoV2 was predominantly spread by droplet, although transmission via fomites and aerosol
was also described. Regular hand-washing alongside surgical masks for those with a confirmed or suspected
diagnosis if tolerated, as well as adequate PPE including gloves, aprons and surgical masks for staff (or
FFP3 masks and face shields if performing aerosolizing procedures) was essential.
Hospital practices
Consideration of modification of hospital practices and patient flows based on careful risk assessments with
available evidence may be required to minimize transmission, to protect both staff and patients:
Social distancing of staff to reduce transmission
Staff PPE requirements – some of these may be centrally mandated by UKHSA, some may be local policy
Risk assessment of procedures that may produce aerosols/transmission events and therefore necessitate a higher
level of PPE
Regular staff testing to minimize staff-to-patient transmission in hospital
Risk assessment of staff vulnerability to infection and reallocation of role as appropriate
Reallocation of staff from elective or low-footfall areas to accommodate increased burden of care in acute units
Cohorting of patients and judicious use of side rooms – this may be helped through the implementation of a traffic
light system of risk to aid decision-making
Restriction of visitor footfall within the hospital. This needs to be counter-balanced with measures to ensure
communication between patients and their carers/next of kin in order to minimize emotional distress (e.g. video
calling facilities)
Care needs to be taken not to cause secondary injury by delaying the diagnosis of non-COVID illnesses due to changes
in hospital processes. There was evidence of preventable death by cardiac causes.
Medication policies may be adjusted to allow for reduced patient contact, e.g. using medications that are administered
OD or by infusion rather than TDS. If this policy extends to antibiotic usage, care needs to be taken to consider the
use of as narrow a spectrum alternative antibiotic as possible – there was a spike in Clostridiodes difficile cases
post-pandemic that was temporally in keeping with antibiotic prescribing changes.
Distinct team shift working may be implemented (e.g. red and blue teams) such that if one member of a team is taken
ill, the rest of their team would be contacts and perhaps advised to self-isolate, but the other team would remain free to
continue work. A situation without separated teams more easily results in everyone being classified as contacts.
Vaccination
During the COVID-19 pandemic, several vaccines were developed at incredible speeds by both industry and
academia. Some received emergency use authorization under regulation 174  including the Oxford/
AstraZeneca vaccine (Vaxzervria, ChAdOx1  nCoV-19) and Pfizer/BioNTech (Comirnaty, BNT162b2) which
were both widely used in the United Kingdom. Vaccination was highly effective at preventing severe disease
(the COVID-19 syndrome of inflammatory lung changes) and there is very limited evidence that this protection wanes over time or with different variants. Protection against symptomatic infection varied more between
vaccines and waned relatively quickly after 3–6 months. Several studies, including randomised control trials
and national observational studies showed the feasibility of using heterologous schedules (different vaccine
platforms for first and second doses) and a permissive approach to the interval between these doses.
Vaccination is the single biggest intervention that protects individuals from severe SARS-CoV2 infection.
It reduces healthcare burden and has allowed the easing of national and international social restrictions.
Vaccines, as any new medication, carry the risk of adverse reactions. There may be some serious adverse
reactions that are so rare that they are not picked up in clinical trials and therefore physicians need to be mindful of any significant and unusual pathologies.

<!-- page:571 -->
552
Acute Medicine
Vaccine-induced thrombocytopaenic
thrombosis (VITT) or thrombosis with
thrombocytopaenia syndrome (TTS)
Venous or arterial thrombosis (often cerebral or abdominal) in the context of
thrombocytopenia, the presence of anti-PF4 antibodies and a raised D-dimer.
Seen predominantly after adenoviral-vectored COVID vaccines and typically
occur within 42 d (more commonly a) after the first dose, b) in under 65 s, c) in
females). Approximate incidence 1/100,000 doses
Myocarditis/Pericarditis
Seen with mRNA vaccines. Usually mild/self-limiting. Approximate incidence
6–14/1,000,000 first doses (8/1,000,000 second doses), more commonly in
younger patients.
Treatments
When considering treatments for the management of COVID-19, there was guidance from central governing
bodies, which were then enacted at local hospitals depending on availability of medication and local policy.
These were regulated by various criteria, such as whether there was an oxygen requirement and whether the
infection was community or hospital acquired. Many of these rules came either directly or by inference from
the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the clinical trials that showed efficacy or from subgroup analyses.
There are broadly two categories of intervention – anti-viral and immunomodulatory. The principles underlying
the timing of their administration are that antivirals should be administered early in the course of disease, whilst
there is still active viral replication, whereas immunomodulatory treatments affect the second ‘immune’ phase of
illness, where immunopathology is causing most of the damage. Below is a list of the more commonly used medications. The indications and contraindications may change depending on the most up-to-date information.
Always refer to specific local guidance for indications, contraindications, duration and dose. Always
consult specialist infection services in complex cases. Indications and exclusions may change after the publication
of this text and clinicians should always seek the most up-to-date information regarding these medications.
It should be noted that the clinical trials which showed efficacy of many of these treatments occurred at
certain points in time during the pandemic. This means that their effect was measured during the presence of
a particular circulating variant in a population that may have been completely naïve or may have been partially
or fully vaccinated. It is impossible to say with certainty what the benefit for some of these treatments are, with
the current and future circulating variants and in a fully immunised population. New evaluations would have to
be undertaken to understand this and would be unfeasibly large and expensive to perform. It is, however, likely
that the benefit of many of the immunomodulatory interventions will not be as great in a seropositive population and those who do not have evidence of inflamed lung (COVID-19) during their SARS-CoV2 infection.
Anti-viral treatments
Medication
Comments
Remdesivir (Veklury)
Adenosine nucleotide prodrug
Treatment of adults and children with COVID-19 with pneumonia requiring supplemental
oxygen or who are at increased risk of progressing to severe COVID-19. Also used in nonhospitalised patients.
Check for hepatic and renal impairment prior to and during use. Care when prescribing to
pregnant or breast-feeding patients.
Nirmatrelvir plus
ritonavir (Paxlovid)
Treatment of adults and children with symptomatic COVID-19 not requiring supplemental
oxygen and who are at increased risk of progressing to severe COVID-19. Also used in
non-hospitalised patients.
Check for hepatic and renal impairment prior to and during use.
Check for drug–drug interactions.
Do not administer during pregnancy. Use with caution in breastfeeding.

<!-- page:572 -->
COVID-19 and future pandemics
553
Medication
Comments
Sotrovimab (Xevudy)
Recombinant human IgG1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting the receptor binding domain
(RBD) of the SARS-CoV2 spike protein.
For patients >12 who do not require supplemental oxygen
Monoclonal antibody efficacy is often dependent on the circulating strain. Sufficient mutation in
the binding region (the RBD) can result in loss of efficacy, which has been the case for several
previous mAbs used alone or in combination. Also used in non-hospitalised patients.
Molnupiravir
(Lageviro)
Only used in the community in the United Kingdom. Originally shown to be efficacious in an
unvaccinated population, the PANORAMIC trial then failed to show superiority above standard
of care in a vaccinated population.
Immunomodulatory treatments
Dexamethasone
Low dose 6 mg (base) daily for 10 days or until discharge, whichever is sooner, was shown to
have a dramatic effect on outcome. Using higher dose steroid resulted in relatively increased
mortality.
Equivalent doses of Prednisolone 40 mg or hydrocortisone can be considered in special situations
including where dexamethasone is contraindicated
Tocilizumab
Anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody
For patients with COVID-19 requiring Oxygen
Check for hepatic and renal impairment prior and during. Dose adjustment in obesity. Care in
those already immunosuppressed. Blunts CRP response for up to 3 months after
administration.
Baricitinib
Selective and reversible inhibitor of Janus kinase 1 and 2 (JAK1/JAK2)
Do not administer during pregnancy or in those breastfeeding.
Inhaled Budesonide
Shown by the PRINCIPLE trial to shorten time to recovery in those at risk of severe illness, but
results were not implemented in the United Kingdom.
Supportive/adjunctive treatments
Oxygen therapy
Extrapolation from wider data in hypoxia (not specific to COVID-19) has informed the
convention of supplemental O2 to achieve 94–98% in hypoxic patients with T1RF. It is unclear
whether supplemental oxygen therapy is beneficial to those with SARS-CoV2 infection and low
oxygen saturations, in terms of mortality or progression to intubation. However, it is a
challenging decision not to give oxygen to patients who are overtly hypoxic.
In those for whom there is symptomatic relief of breathlessness, it may be beneficial as well as
for those in whom other comorbidity (cardiac and respiratory) may be destabilized by low
oxygen saturations.
Pressure support
CPAP was used empirically, in part, to maintain critical care capacity. There is some limited
evidence that CPAP may reduce progression to intubation and is reasonably used as first-line
supportive therapy in those for whom supplemental oxygen alone was insufficient. However, a
clear mortality benefit has not yet been established.
Patients with pre-existing conditions and T2RF should still be considered for bi-level pressure
support.
Thromboprophylaxis
The most recent reviews suggest that routinely increasing standard prophylactic anticoagulation
doses does not confer a survival benefit in hospitalised patients, however UK practice still varies
due to variability in results from a number of randomised control trials.
Community
management
Some patients may be able to be managed in the community on a ‘virtual ward’ if safety criteria
are met and suitable hospital infrastructure is in place.
Follow-up
Chest imaging follow-up may be of benefit as part of a holistic system to identify those who
may require further follow-up in a post-COVID or ‘Long COVID’ service.

<!-- page:573 -->
554
Acute Medicine
Complications of SARS-CoV2 infection
Venous thromboembolism
Imaging (CTPA/USS Dopler) to diagnose and anticoagulation to treat. Use prophylactic
anticoagulation in all inpatients and consider selected high-risk outpatients.
Myocardial injury
Frequently self-limiting if mild. Seek specialist advice if severe.
Secondary infection, including
bacterial pneumonia
Relatively rare, but treatment with antibiotics where clinically indicated according to
local guidelines.
Dermatological manifestations
Several described phenomena (vesicular eruptions, maculopapular eruptions, urticarial
lesions, livedo or necrosis and pseudo-chilblain).
Generally non-severe and self-limiting. The different manifestations occur at varying
timepoints through the disease course.
Long COVID
Characterised commonly by extreme tiredness, shortness of breath, loss of smell
and muscle aches. However, there are many other symptoms patients can
experience post-COVID-19 including brain fog, chest pain/tightness, insomnia,
palpitations, dizziness, paraesthesia, arthralgia, depression, anxiety, tinnitus, ear
ache, nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, anorexia, cough, headache and sore
throat.
Recognition of the syndrome and referral to appropriate local services when criteria
are met is an important aspect of management of this condition.
Secondary pandemic injuries
Missed diagnoses
Care must be taken to ensure that other diagnoses are not missed through increased
infection prevention precautions – such as malaria in the returning traveller and
myocardial infarction.
Delayed non-COVID
emergency care
Routine emergency and urgent care should not be compromised. Adequate mitigating
measures should be taken such as PPE and managing hospital flows.
Delayed elective/routine care
Planning at a local and national level needs to happen to mitigate this.
Mental/psychological health
Data are still coming through regarding suicide and reported attempted suicide rates
during the pandemic. It is not currently clear exactly what effect the pandemic had.
There were certainly impacts on psychiatric presentations to secondary care and
physicians need to be aware of the impact that such pandemics have on psycho-social
wellbeing. In 2022, the number of mental health referrals remained above
pre-pandemic levels.
Financial/Educational
Many people and businesses were affected by the pandemic and experienced
financial hardship. Children were also heavily impacted by massive interruption to
education.
Special cases
Immunocompromised and other ‘at risk’ patients may not respond as well or at all to vaccination and therefore
may still be at risk of severe COVID-19. Additionally, their immune system is weakened, either by their underlying disease or iatrogenically. Depending on the nature of immunosuppression, there may be an increased risk
of prolonged viral replication or failure of viral clearance. Alternatively, there may be detrimental consequences
to further immunosuppression as part of therapy for the immunopathological stage of COVID-19. Evidence is
generally lacking surrounding this, and discussion with specialists is advised. This group in particular may benefit from repeated COVID-19 vaccination doses.

<!-- page:574 -->
COVID-19 and future pandemics
555
Research
Rapidly enacted descriptive research studies such as ISARIC were key to describing the illness when little
was known about it. Pivotal interventional trials such as RECOVERY and REMAP-CAP successfully defined
successful interventions and importantly excluded ineffective and potentially harmful interventions. In future
pandemics, the maintenance of such studies that are ‘ready to go’ will be key to a rapid response. Awareness
of clinicians to recruit to such studies enables successful interventions to be rapidly identified. Clinicians
need also to be careful of posited treatments without evidence, which have the potential to cause harm
both directly and indirectly through individuals increasing their risk-taking behaviour and not seeking timely
medical attention.
The next pandemic
The future of SARS-CoV2 is that it will likely become a part of our daily life as other seasonal human
coronaviruses have done in the past. The threat of a resurgence of a more pathogenic variant is still present,
but may not be very high. We are now in a better situation to mitigate the impacts of any future pandemics
through experiences and established systems that can hopefully rapidly be resurrected if required.
