# CHAPTER 79 Septic arthritis

- Pages: 575-579
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:575 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
556
Consider this diagnosis in any patient who has fever with joint pain and swelling, particularly if only one large
joint is involved.
•	 Septic arthritis is typically mono-articular but can be poly-articular (15% of cases).
•	 The knee is the joint most commonly involved, followed by the elbow, shoulder and hip.
•	 Staphylococcus aureus is the causative organism in 50% of cases of native joint infection; other causative
organisms include streptococci, gonococci and Gram-negative bacilli.
•	 Prosthetic joint infection is caused by a wider range of pathogens.
Priorities
Your clinical assessment should address the following points:
•	 Does the patient have arthritis or periarticular inflammation (bursitis, tendinitis or cellulitis)? Painful
limitation of movement of the joint suggests arthritis. Causes of acute mono- or oligo-arthritis are given
in Table 79.1.
Septic arthritis
Kehinde Sunmboye and John L. Klein
CHAPTER 79
Table 79.1  Comparison of gonococcal and non-gonococcal septic arthritis.
Gonococcal septic arthritis
Non-gonococcal septic arthritis
Organisms
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Staphylococcus aureus
Beta-haemolytic streptococci
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Gram-negative rods
Patient profile
Young, healthy and sexually
active
Elderly, rheumatoid arthritis, prosthetic joint, IV
drug use, bacteraemia, immunosuppression
Initial presentation
Migratory polyarthralgia,
tenosynovitis and dermatitis
Typically with a single hot, swollen, painful joint,
but can be poly-articular (15% of cases)
Joints involved
Often poly-articular, especially
knee and wrist
Knee joint is most commonly involved, followed
by the elbow, shoulder and hip
Other signs
Tenosynovitis, rash
Source of bacteraemia
Gram stain of synovial fluid
<25% positive
50–75% positive
Culture of synovial fluid
25% positive
85–95% positive
Blood culture
<10% positive
50% positive
Genitourinary culture (swab of
urethra, cervix and anorectum)
80% positive
Not indicated

<!-- page:576 -->
Septic arthritis
557
•	 Is the patient at risk of septic arthritis? Septic arthritis usually follows an overt or occult bacteraemia (e.g.
from infective endocarditis, pneumonia or IV drug use) in a patient at risk because of rheumatoid arthritis,
the presence of a prosthetic joint or immunosuppression from disease or use of medication such as biologic
therapies for active autoimmune rheumatic disease Examples of biologic therapies include, but are not limited to, tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, Rituximab, Tocilizumab to name a few.
•	 Could this be crystal arthritis (gout or pseudogout; Chapter 92): is there a history of previous similar attacks
of arthritis?
•	 Could this be reactive arthritis: is there an associated rash, diarrhoea, urethritis or uveitis?
•	 Could this be gonococcal arthritis (Table 79.1)?
Aspirate the joint (Chapter 111) and send synovial fluid for cell count (in an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA) tube; normal cell count is <180/mm3, most mononuclear), Gram stain, culture and microscopy under
polarized light for crystals. Other investigations needed urgently are given in Table 79.2.
•	 If you are not familiar with joint aspiration, ask the help of a rheumatologist or orthopaedic surgeon.
•	 Both crystal and septic arthritis give rise to a purulent effusion, although the white cell count is usually higher
in septic arthritis (50,000–200,000/mm3), with a polymorphonuclear cell count of >90%.
•	 Bloodstaining of the effusion is common in pseudogout but rare in sepsis.
Further management
Organisms on Gram stain of synovial fluid, or high probability of septic
arthritis
Start antibiotic therapy IV (Table 79.3).
•	 Intra-articular administration is not needed.
•	 The antibiotic regimen may need modification in the light of blood and synovial fluid culture results: discuss
this with a microbiologist.
•	 Antibiotic therapy for non-gonococcal septic arthritis usually needs to be given for two to four weeks, initially IV, but may be switched to an appropriate oral agent in uncomplicated cases.
•	 Gonococcal arthritis may be cured with just one to two weeks of therapy.
If septic arthritis is confirmed, seek advice on further management from a rheumatologist or orthopaedic
surgeon.
•	 Daily aspiration of the joint until an effusion no longer re-accumulates is an acceptable approach where
access to the joint is easy (e.g. the knee).
•	 Other larger joints (e.g. hip or shoulder) may be more effectively drained by arthroscopic washout.
•	 While the infection is resolving, the joint should be immobilized using a splint or cast.
Table 79.2  Investigation in suspected septic arthritis.
Joint aspiration (Chapter 111)
X-ray joint for baseline
Blood glucose
Creatinine and electrolytes
Liver function tests
Full blood count
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
Blood culture (×2)
Urine stick test, microscopy and culture
Swab of urethra, cervix and anorectum for culture and nucleic acid amplification test if gonococcal infection is possible

<!-- page:577 -->
558
Acute Medicine
•	 Physiotherapy should be started early.
•	 Give a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) for pain relief (e.g. Naproxen or Etoricoxib).
•	 In patients with gonococcal arthritis, a sexual health screen of the patient and his/her sexual partners should
be offered.
No organisms on Gram stain of synovial fluid and low
probability of septic arthritis
Consider the other causes of acute arthritis (Table 79.1).
•	 Pseudogout is a common cause of acute mono- or oligo-arthritis in the elderly. Hold off antibiotic therapy
(pending the results of blood and synovial fluid culture for definite exclusion of infection).
•	 Treat with an NSAID, covered with a proton-pump inhibitor in the elderly or patients with previous peptic
ulceration.
•	 If gout is confirmed (also check plasma urate) and fails to respond to an NSAID, use colchicine. Allopurinol
should not be started until the acute attack has completely resolved.
Further reading
Brusch JL (2023) Septic arthritis treatment & management: approach considerations, antibiotic therapy, Joint
Immobilization and Physical Therapy. Available from: https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/236299treatment. [Accessed: 8 May 2024].
Momodu II, Savaliya V. (2025) Septic arthritis. [Updated 2023 Jul 3]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island
(FL): StatPearls Publishing. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538176/.
Sharff KA, Richards EP, Townes JM. (2013) Clinical management of septic arthritis. Curr Rheumatol Rep 15,
332. DOI: 10.1007/s11926-013-0332-4.
Table 79.3  Initial antibiotic therapy for suspected native joint septic arthritis.
Antibiotic therapy (IV, high dose)
Organisms on gram stain
Not allergic to penicillin
Allergic to penicillin
Gram-positive cocci
Flucloxacillin
Vancomycin if Methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) suspected
Clindamycin
Gram-negative cocci
Ceftriaxone
Ceftriaxone (mild allergy) Seek expert
advice if severe allergy
Gram-negative rods
Piperacillin-tazobactam
Ciprofloxacin
None seen
Flucloxacillin
Vancomycin if MRSA suspected
Clindamycin

<!-- page:578 -->
Haematology
SECTION 9
