# CHAPTER 85 Management of anticoagulation

- Pages: 609-621
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:609 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
590
Indications and choice of anticoagulants
The most common indications for therapeutic anticoagulation are atrial fibrillation (AF) and venous
thromboembolism (VTE) (see Table  85.1). The main anticoagulatants and their key characteristics are
summarised in Box 85.1.
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are licensed and as efficacious as warfarin for non-valvular AF (i.e. AF not
associated with severe mitral stenosis) and VTE. They are associated with approximately 50% reduced risk of
intracranial haemorrhage compared to warfarin, do not require monitoring, and have few drug interactions.
They are therefore most people’s anticoagulant of choice for licensed indications of VTE and AF.
Warfarin is the anticoagulant of choice for metal heart valves, people with recurrent VTE who need a higher
therapeutic range, thrombosis (VTE or arterial) associated with triple-positive antiphospholipid syndrome; CrCl
<15–30 mL/min.
Management of anticoagulation
Susan Shapiro
CHAPTER 85
Table 85.1  Indications for anticoagulation and recommended anticoagulant.
Indication
Low-molecular-weight
heparin (LMWH)
Vitamin K
antagonists (VKAs)
Direct-acting oral
anticoagulants (DOACs)
Primary prevention of VTE
post-operatively, in hospital
inpatients or post surgery
Yes
No
Yes: for total knee and hip
replacements only
Treatment of VTE (acute and
long-term-secondary prevention)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Treatment of
cancer-associated VTE
Yes (first line for
gastrointestinal and
genitourinary cancers)
Not recommended
(less effective than
LMWH)
Yes
Treatment of unstable angina/
NSTEMI
Yes
No
No
Atrial fibrillation (AF)
Short-term (bridging) only
Yes
Yes
Prevention of mechanical-heartvalve-associated thromboembolic
events and thrombosis
Short-term (bridging) only
Yes
No
VTE, venous thromboembolism.

<!-- page:610 -->
Management of anticoagulation
591
Heparin
Derived from pig or cow intestines.
Heparins act indirectly by binding to the endogenous anticoagulant anti-thrombin III
(AT), enhancing its inhibition of clotting factors.
Unfractionated heparin (UFH) is comprised of different-length polysaccharides. It
needs to be given intravenously, and monitored using either APTT or antiXa levels.
It has a short half-life and can be fully reversed with protamine sulphate. It can be
used in renal failure.
LMWH has replaced UFH as the preferred option in most clinical situations. Examples
of when UFH would be considered are: patients who might need anticoagulation
to be stopped rapidly (those at high risk of bleeding or who may require emergency
invasive procedure); patients with acute VTE and CrCl < 20 mL/min.
See Table 85.2 for a regimen for administering UFH infusion.
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) contains the shorter polysaccharides only.
LMWH is dosed according to body weight, once or twice daily subcutaneously.
It has a half-life of approximately 12 h.
It does not require routine monitoring, but antiXa can be used to check levels if
required, e.g. renal impairment, overdose.
Dose adjustments are required if CrCL <20 mL/min.
Commonly used LMWH include dalteparin, enoxaparin and tinzaparin. Each has a
specific dosing regimen. See Table 85.3 for dalteparin dosing for VTE by body weight.
LMWH can only be partially reversed by protamine sulphate.
Fondaparinux is related, but has pure anti-factor Xa activity.
It is dosed according to body weight, once daily subcutaneous.
It has a longer half-life than LMWH (about 17 h) and cannot be reversed with protamine. It is most commonly used as an alternative anticoagulation in heparin-induced
thrombocytopaenia (HIT) (see Table 85.2).
Warfarin and
other vitamin K
antagonists
(VKAs)
Deplete the level of the reduced form of vitamin K in the liver, which is required for
activation of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors (factors II [prothrombin], VII,
IX and X).
Vitamin K has a slow onset and offset of action. When warfarin is initiated for acute
DVT, it must be given with at least 5 d LMWH cover initially even if therapeutic INR
is achieved before this.
Everyone requires individualised dosing of warfarin, and monitoring using the INR.
For people on long-term warfarin, the majority need INR monitored every 3–4 wk.
Box 85.1  Types of anticoagulant and key characteristics.

<!-- page:611 -->
592
Acute Medicine
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) is generally used short-term as it is subcutaneous and long-term
use is associated with osteoporosis. It has minimal drug interactions but is renally excreted, and dosing should
be reduced if CrCl <20 mL/min. It remains the anticoagulant of choice for cancer-VTE associated with gastrointestinal and genitourinary cancers as it has reduced bleeding risk compared to DOACs for these cancers in
clinical trials.
Patient counselling of risks/benefits of anticoagulation and choice of anticoagulant is crucial.
Warfarin is not usually recommended for people who require a dosette box, and
dose adjustments following INR tests are challenging: speak to your local warfarin
service or haematologist.
The target INR and range must be stipulated when starting someone on warfarin.
The most common target INR is 2.5 (range 2–3). People with recurrent thrombosis
may require a higher range, e.g. target INR 3.5 (range 3–4), as well as people with
metallic heart valves.
Drug interactions with warfarin are common and can be serious. When starting or
stopping a treatment in a patient taking warfarin, check the list in the British
National Formulary for an interaction.
An example initiation of a patient on warfarin (dosing and blood tests) is shown in
Table 85.4.
Warfarin can be reversed with vitamin K (oral or intravenous) and prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) which contains factors II/VII/IX/X.
Direct Oral
Anticoagulants
(DOACs)
There are currently four DOACS: dabigatran is a direct inhibitor of factor IIa, and
apixaban/rivaroxaban/edoxaban are direct inhibitors of factor Xa.
They are taken orally at fixed dose, once or twice a day.
Similar to LMWH, they have a half-life of approximately 12 h, and are largely renally
cleared; and so should not be used when CrCl <15–30 mL/min.
They do not require routine monitoring. They have a variable effect on PT/APTT and
the coagulation screen may be normal despite therapeutic levels of DOAC.
DOAC levels might be helpful in certain circumstances, e.g. renal impairment, overdose, emergency surgery. Specific DOAC tests have to be requested, e.g. apixaban
levels; many, but not all, hospitals will be able to do these tests.
They have few drug interactions but key contraindications include: rifampicin, azole
antifungals, HIV protease inhibitors and the antiepileptics carbamazepine and
phenytoin.
Standard dosing regimens are shown in Table 85.5.
In case of bleeding: dabigatran has a direct reversal agent (idaricizumab), and andexanet alfa is licensed for reversal of apixaban and rivaroxaban. Tranexamic acid and PCC
can be used to counteract the effects of edoxaban, or the other DOACs if specific
reversal agents are not available.

<!-- page:612 -->
Management of anticoagulation
593
Table 85.2  Example of protocol for unfractionated heparin by infusion for adults weighing up to 120 kg. Local
hospital guidelines should be followed in practice.
Loading dose
5000 units IV over 5 min
Infusion
Give as a continuous infusion via a syringe pump using 1000 units/mL concentration.
Start the infusion at 1400 units/h (1.4 mL/h of the 1000 units per mL solution).
Monitoring
Check the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) at 4 h.
Ensure that the request form clearly states the patient is receiving heparin.
Table 85.3  Example of LWMH dosing: DALTEPARIN for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
(DVT/PE) in adults (month 1 dosing).
Weight (kg)
Dose for DVT/PE treatment Subcutaneous administration (units)
Less than 46 kg
7500 once daily
46–56
10,000 once daily
57–68
12,500 once daily
69–82
15,000 once daily
83–98
18,000 once daily
More than 98 kg
Consult local guidelines: some local guidelines advise higher doses of dalteparin as weight
increases
Table 85.4  Starting warfarin. Example fast loading regiment for acute VTE. Use local guidelines in practice.
Day
International Normalized Ratio (INR)
Dose of warfarin (mg) to be given that evening
1
1.3 or above
Establish cause of coagulation disorder.
Do not start warfarin before discussion with a haematologist.
<1.3
5
2
5
3
10
10
1.5–2
5
2.1–2.5
3
2.6–3
1
>3
0
4
<1.6
10
1.6–1.7
7
1.8–1.9
6
2–2.3
5
2.4–2.7
4
2.8–3
3
3.1–3.5
2
3.6–4
1
>4
0

<!-- page:613 -->
594
Acute Medicine
Adjust the dose as follows:
APTT (target 1.5–2.5 × control)
Action
>5
Stop for 1 h then reduce infusion rate by 1.0 mL/h.
4.1–5
Reduce infusion rate by 0.5 mL/h.
3.1–4
Reduce infusion rate by 0.3 mL/h.
2.6–3
Reduce infusion rate by 0.1 mL/h.
1.5–2.5
No change.
1.2–1.4
Increase infusion rate by 0.1 mL/h.
1.0–1.2
Increase infusion rate by 0.2 mL/h.
After each change in infusion rate, recheck APTT in 4–6 h, and every 24 h if stable.
Check the platelet count at least on alternate days. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), which may be
complicated by thrombosis, is most likely to occur 4–10 days after starting heparin. Stop heparin immediately
and take advice from a haematologist if there is a significant fall in platelet count. See Table 82.1 and Appendix
82.1 (Chapter 82) for further information on the diagnosis of HIT.
Atrial fibrillation
The CHA2DS2VASc score (Table 85.6) estimates annual risk of stroke or systemic thromboembolism in nonvalvular AF (Table 85.7). All patients with AF, whether paroxysmal, persistent or permanent are at increased
risk of thromboembolism. Anticoagulation should be considered with a score of ≥2 for women ≥1 for men.
With anticoagulants, the reduction in the risk of thrombosis must always be balanced against the increased
risk of bleeding by being on an anticoagulant. The HASBLED score (Table 85.8) estimates the annual risk of
major bleeding for patients on warfarin for AF (Table 85.9); and the ORBIT score is a new score which is similar to the HASBLED but does not take into account the choice of anticoagulant (Tables 85.10 and 85.11).
NICE recommend the ORBIT score over other bleeding scores as evidence shows it has better accuracy in
Table 85.5  Dosing of direct oral anticoagulants by indication.
Dabigatran
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Acute VTE
150 mg BD following
five days of LMWH
Day 1–21 : 15 mg BD; Day
22 : 20 mg OD*
Days 1–7 : 10 mg BD;
Day 7 : 5 mg BD
Prevention of
recurrent VTE
150 mg BD
10 mg OD, or 20 mg OD* for
high-risk patients
2.5 mg BD
110 mg BD**
Thromboprophylaxis
220 mg OD
10 mg OD
2.5 mg BD
150 mg OD**
Atrial fibrillation
150 mg BD
20 mg OD*
5 mg BD
110 mg BD**
2.5 mg BD†
* 20 mg OD rivaroxaban should be taken with food, to aid absorption.
** A dose of 150 mg OD for thromboprophylaxis or 110 mg BD for AF/recurrent VTE should be considered in patients
>75 yr or patients with eGFR <50 mL/min.
† The reduced doses of apixaban and dabigatran in atrial fibrillation are recommended for patients with two of the
following: age > 60 yr, weight < 60 kg, serum creatinine > 133 μmol/L.

<!-- page:614 -->
Management of anticoagulation
595
Table 85.6  CHA2DS2VASc score (estimates the annual risk of stroke or systemic thromboembolism in non-valvular AF).
Variable
Score
C
Congestive heart failure or left ventricular systolic dysfunction
1 for yes
H
Hypertension
1 for yes
Blood pressure consistently above 140/90 mmHg (or treated hypertension on medication)
A2
Age > 75 yr
2 for yes
D
Diabetes mellitus
1 for yes
S2
Prior stroke or TIA or systemic thromboembolism
2 for yes
V
Vascular disease (peripheral arterial disease, coronary artery disease and aortic atheroma)
1 for yes
A
Age 65–74 yr
1 for yes
Sc
Sex category
1 for female
Total score
0–9
(as age < 65 scores 0, age 65–74 scores 1 and age ≥ 75 scores 2)
Table 85.7  Cumulative CHA2DS2VASc score and risk of stroke or systemic thromboembolism.
Cumulative CHA2DS2 VASc score
Annual risk of stroke or systemic thromboembolism (%)
0
0.3
1
1.3
2
2.2
3
3.2
4
4
5
6.7
6–8
9.8
9
15.2
Table 85.8  The HAS-BLED score (estimates the annual risk of major bleeding for patients on warfarin for atrial
fibrillation).
Variable
Score
H
Hypertension
1 for yes, 0 for no
Systolic BP > 160 mmHg
A
Abnormal renal or liver function
1 for yes, 0 for no
Renal disease:
1 for yes, 0 for no
Dialysis, transplant or serum creatinine >200 μmol/L
Liver disease:
Cirrhosis, serum bilirubin >2× normal or AST/ALT/alkaline phosphatase >3× normal
S
Stroke history
1 for yes, 0 for no
B
Bleeding risk
1 for yes, 0 for no
Prior major bleeding or predisposition to bleeding
L
Labile INR
1 for yes, 0 for no
Time in therapeutic range <60%
E
Elderly
1 for yes, 0 for no
Age > 65
D
Drug/alcohol history
1 for yes, 0 for no
Medication usage predisposing to bleeding (antiplatelet agents, NSAIDs)
1 for yes, 0 for no
Alcohol consumption ≥8 units/wk
Total score
0–9

<!-- page:615 -->
596
Acute Medicine
predicting absolute bleeding risk than other bleeding risk scores. However, patients at the highest risk of
bleeding are often those who have the highest risk of stroke; it is therefore advised that these bleeding
scores should be used as a tool to identify and control reversible bleeding risks in order to help reduce the
bleeding risk.
Duration of anticoagulation following VTE
and predicting risk of recurrence
Three months of anticoagulation is required to treat acute VTE (deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism).
In general, VTE provoked by a reversible risk factor (see Chapter 31) has a low probability of recurrence and
anticoagulation can be safely stopped after this point.
Long-term anticoagulation (beyond the initial three months treatment) should be considered for secondary
prevention, that is to prevent recurrent VTE, in people with unprovoked VTE, or a significant ongoing VTE risk
factor (e.g. disseminated malignancy) following acute proximal deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary
Table 85.9  Cumulative HAS-BLED score and risk of major bleeding.
HAS-BLED score (1–9)
Annual risk of major bleeding (%)
0
0.9
1
3.4
2
4.1
3
5.8
4
8.9
5–9
9.1
Table 85.10  The ORBIT score (estimates the annual risk of major bleeding for people with AF on anticoagulation).
Variable
Score
Haemoglobin <13 g/dL or haematocrit <40%
Yes +2
No 0
Age > 74 yr
Yes +1
No 0
Bleeding history:
Any history of gastrointestinal bleeding, intracranial bleeding or haemorrhagic stroke
Yes +2
No 0
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) <60 mL/min/1.73m2
Yes +2
No 0
Treatment with antiplatelet agents
Yes +1
No 0
Table 85.11  Cumulative ORBIT score and risk of major bleeding.
ORBIT score
Bleeds per 100 patient-years
Low (0–2)
2.4
Medium (3)
4.7
High (≥4)
8.1

<!-- page:616 -->
Management of anticoagulation
597
embolism (PE). Conversely, if the VTE was unprovoked or provoked secondary to an irreversible risk factor, for
example incurable disseminated malignancy, indefinite anticoagulation should be considered.
Management of bleeding in a patient taking an anticoagulant
or antiplatelet drug
General measures are summarized in Table 85.12, and specific measures in Tables 85.13–85.15.
Table 85.12  Management of bleeding in a patient taking an anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug.
General measures
Stop the anticoagulant drug
Document the timing and amount of the last drug dose and presence of pre-existing renal or hepatic impairment
Estimate the half-life and length of functional defect induced by the drug
Assess the source of bleeding
Request full blood count, prothrombin time, APTT, thrombin time, fibrinogen; renal function
If available, request a specific laboratory test to measure the antithrombotic effect of the drug, e.g. INR, antiXa, apixaban level
Correct haemodynamic compromise with intravenous fluids and red cell transfusion
Apply mechanical pressure, if possible
Use endoscopic, radiological or surgical measures to achieve haemostasis
Source: Adapted from British Society for Haematology. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
Table 85.13  Specific measures according to the anticoagulant/antiplatelet agent.
Anticoagulant/antiplatelet
Specific measures
Heparins
Unfractionated heparin by
continuous IV infusion
Stop the infusion.
(half-life 1–2 h)
For rapid reversal in major bleeding, give IV protamine sulphate. 1 mg protamine
neutralizes 80–100 units of heparin. If the infusion has been stopped for 30 min
or longer, give protamine 25 mg IV by slow injection over 10 min. If the infusion
has only just been stopped, give protamine 50 mg IV by slow injection over
10 min.
LMWH
Stop the LMWH.
(half-life 12 h)
Check FBC, coagulation screen and fibrinogen.
Check anti-Xa level.
If last dose of LMWH heparin was <8 h, give protamine. 1 mg per 100 anti-Xa
units of LMWH IV, by slow injection over 10 min (maximum 50 mg).
Consider 1 g tranexamic acid IV.
Warfarin and other VKAs
For rapid reversal in major bleeding or in head injury*, give four-factor prothrombin
complex (contains factors II, VII, IX and X), e.g. Beriplex® or Octaplex®: give
Beriplex or Octaplex 50 units/kg (to a maximum single dose of Beriplex 5000 units
or Octaplex 3000 units). Fresh frozen plasma produces suboptimal anticoagulation
reversal and should only be used if prothrombin complex is not available.
(continued)

<!-- page:617 -->
598
Acute Medicine
Anticoagulant/antiplatelet
Specific measures
Give vitamin K 5–10 mg IV by slow injection.
For non-major bleeding give 1–3 mg intravenous vitamin K (correction of the INR
is seen within 6–8 h; this has a faster time to effect than oral administration).
DOACS (half-life about 12 h)
Dabigatran
Stop dabigatran and ascertain time of last dose.
Consider use of PRAXBIND (idaracizumab): 5 mg bolus by IV injection.
Rivaroxaban/apixaban
Stop drug and ascertain time of last dose.
Consider andexanet alfa for licensed indications, e.g. life-threatening
gastrointestinal bleeding.
For situations when andexanet alfa is not licensed, consider 1 g tranexamic acid
and PCC.
Consider discussing with haematologist.
Edoxaban
Stop edoxaban and ascertain time of last dose.
Consider 1 g tranexamic acid and PCC.
Consider discussing with haematologist.
Antiplatelet agents, e.g.
aspirin, clopidogrel,
ticagrelor
Consider transfusion of two pools of platelets.
NB Protamine is contraindicated if the patient has a fish allergy. Protamine can cause hypotension, bradycardia and
anaphylaxis.
* In head injury sufficient to cause facial or scalp laceration, bruising or haematoma, arrange for urgent CT head. If there
is a suspicion of intracerebral bleed, reverse warfarin before the results of the CT head and INR are known. Even in
patients with a normal CT head, a supra-therapeutic INR should be corrected with oral or IV vitamin K because of the
risk of delayed bleeding. Adapted from: British Society for Haematology.
Table 85.13  (Continued)
Table 85.14  Management of over-anticoagulation in a patient taking
warfarin or another vitamin K antagonist who is not bleeding.
INR
Action
<5
Reduce maintenance dose
5–8
Omit 1–2 doses and reduce maintenance dose
>8
Give 1–5 mg oral vitamin K
Source: Adapted from: British Society for Haematology.
Table 85.15  Management of oral anticoagulation for elective surgery and invasive procedures.
Warfarin
For patients on warfarin, some minor procedures such as joint injections can be carried out without
interrupting warfarin therapy; however, for major procedures, warfarin needs to be stopped and the INR
normalised.
Warfarin would standardly be stopped 5 d prior to surgery, with the INR measured the day before
surgery; allowing correction with vitamin K if it is >1.5.
Warfarin can usually be resumed at the normal maintenance dose on the evening of surgery.
Patients at high thrombotic risk (e.g. mechanical heart valves and acute VTE within last 3 mo) require
bridging therapy with LMWH when the INR is subtherapeutic (pre/post procedure).

<!-- page:618 -->
Management of anticoagulation
599
Management of oral anticoagulation for elective surgery
and invasive procedures
The perioperative/periprocedural management of patients who are receiving anticoagulation depends on the
underlying thrombotic risk and the risk of bleeding associated with the surgery/procedure.
Apart from in an emergency, for example insertion of a central line in a critically unwell patient, it is safer to
allow anticoagulants to be metabolized/excreted rather than attempting to reverse them before a planned
invasive procedure (e.g. lumbar puncture, chest drain and ascitic drain), as reversal agents are potentially prothrombotic and may expose the patient unnecessarily to plasma products. Safe timing of a procedure requires
knowledge of when the last dose of anticoagulant was taken, the half-life of the drug, the excretion pathway,
and any factors in the patient that may alter this, for example deranged renal function.
DOACS
Apixaban/rivaroxaban/edoxaban should be stopped 24 h before a low-risk bleeding procedure, and
48 h prior to a high-risk bleeding procedure (for people with CrCl >30 mL/min). If CrCl is <30 mL/min, then
this duration needs to be increased.
Dabigatran should be stopped 24 h before a low-risk bleeding procedure and 48 h prior to a high-risk
bleeding procedure in people with CrCl >80 mL/min. For those with CrCl<80 mL/min, then this duration
needs to be extended (dabigatran is more reliant on renal clearance than the other DOACs).
Following a low bleeding risk procedure, a DOAC can be recommenced once haemostasis is secure, usually
at 48 h. Following major surgery, or procedure with high bleeding risk, a DOAC should not be reintroduced
until at least 48 h post procedure. Prophylactic LMWH should be considered in the interim (providing
haemostasis is secure).
Due to the short half-lives of DOACs, bridging with therapeutic LMWH is not required.
Table 85.15  (Continued)

<!-- page:620 -->
Renal Medicine
SECTION 10
