# CHAPTER 87 Chronic kidney disease, including end-stage kidney disease

- Pages: 629-636
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:629 -->
610
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Definition
•	 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) refers to the presence of varying degrees of renal dysfunction, categorised by
abnormal estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and albuminuria, for three months or longer.
•	 CKD is classified based on the underlying cause and staged based on calculated eGFR (G1 through G5, with
higher stages reflecting lower eGFR) and degree of albuminuria (A1 through A3, with higher stages reflecting greater degrees of albuminuria); see Figure 87.1.
•	 End-stage kidney disease refers to CKD stage V in addition to patients receiving renal replacement therapy.
•	 Renal replacement therapies include haemodialysis (which can be delivered in-centre or at home), peritoneal
dialysis or transplant.
Evaluation of cause of CKD
•	 The most common causes of CKD worldwide include diabetes, hypertension, glomerulonephritis and polycystic kidney disease.
•	 Once chronicity has been established (see Table 87.1), establishing a cause for CKD involves a multi-faceted
approach (see Table 87.2) including a detailed medical history and examination with a particular focus on
the following:
•	 Medications: Focus on newly started agents, particularly those known for their nephrotoxicity and any
over-the-counter herbal remedies and allergies which may not be volunteered directly. Analgesics such as
non-steroidal agents are commonly used ad hoc by patients.
•	 Symptoms and signs of systemic diseases should be elicited systematically as renal dysfunction can be
a prominent feature of conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus, connective tissue disorders and
vasculitis. This includes asking patients about weight loss, anorexia, night sweats, a reduction in appetite,
general lassitude with no obvious alternative cause, upper respiratory symptoms, haemoptysis, general
myalgia, arthralgia, rashes, ulcers, hair loss.
•	 Symptoms and signs of urinary tract abnormalities, particularly in men, can provide clues towards
potential obstructive uropathies. Nocturia, starting and stopping of the flow of urine, hesitancy and poor
stream are all suggestive of potential bladder outflow obstruction and warrant prompt imaging and further
discussion with urological surgeons. A large palpable mass arising from the suprapubic region, with dullness
to percussion may suggest a grossly enlarged bladder with chronic urinary retention, warranting urgent
Chronic kidney disease, including
end-stage kidney disease
Khizr Nawab and Matthew Brook
CHAPTER 87

<!-- page:630 -->
Chronic kidney disease, including end-stage kidney disease
611
catheterisation and further urology investigations. Flank pain associated with macroscopic haematuria may
be suggestive of ureteric calculi. It is important to note that patients will often report passing normal volumes
of urine despite evidence of urinary retention or upper tract obstruction causing hydronephrosis.
•	 Abnormalities of urine such as gross haematuria, particularly in relation to recent upper respiratory infections, and frothy urine, which can be due high levels of proteinuria, are suggestive of glomerular disorders.
•	 Eliciting any history of diabetes is important due to the sheer ubiquity of this condition. Remember
that advanced CKD, unfortunately, can sometimes be the first presentation of diabetes mellitus. For established diabetics, it is important to establish the age at diagnosis, type 1 versus type 2 diabetes, glycaemic
control over the years and microvascular (retinopathy, neuropathy) and macrovascular complications of
diabetes. Diabetic nephropathy typically causes a chronically progressive, proteinuric CKD, in association
with other microvascular complications, particularly retinopathy. It is important to use this opportunity to
comprehensively establish the impact diabetes has on their health as a whole and to involve the diabetologists if needed.
Persistent albuminuria categories
Description and range
A1
Normal to mildly
increased
Moderately
increased
Severely
increased
<30 mg/g
<3 mg/mmol
30-300 mg/g
3-30 mg/mmol
300 mg/g
>30 mg/mmol
A2
A3
Green: low risk (If no other markers of kidney disease, no CKD); Yellow: moderately Increased risk; Orange:
high risk; Red: very high risk. GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.
KDIGO: prognosis of CKD by GFR
and albuminuria categories
GFR categories (mL/min/1.73 m2)
Description and range
Normal or high
≥90
Mildly decreased
60–89
Mildly to
moderately decreased 45–59
Moderately to
severely decreased
30–44
Severely decreased
15–29
Kidney failure
<15
G1
G2
G3a
G3b
G4
G5
Figure 87.1  Adapted from KDIGO 2024 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic
kidney disease.
Table 87.1  Adapted from executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and
management of chronic kidney disease: known knowns and known unknowns.
i.	 Proof of chronicity (duration of a minimum of three months) can be established by:
ii.	 Review of past estimated or measured GFR
iii.	 Review of past measurements of albuminuria, proteinuria or urinary microscopic examinations
iv.	 Imaging findings such as reduced kidney size and reduced cortical thickness
v.	 Histopathological interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy based on a previous renal biopsy sample
vi.	 Repeat measurements within and beyond the three-month point

<!-- page:631 -->
612
Acute Medicine
•	 Eliciting a history of hypertension is also similarly important. Secondary hypertension is more likely
than primary hypertension to be associated with renal impairment, and there is typically evidence of
other end-organ damage (cardiomyopathy and retinopathy). Persistent hypertension, refractory to multiple agents, in an ambulatory setting is far more likely to be associated with renal impairment. It is
important to note, however, that with advanced CKD and attendant fluid overload, hypertension is
exceedingly common and there must be a convincing antecedent history of severe hypertension if renal
failure is to be blamed on it. Certain nephritic syndromes also present with hypertension as part of the
clinical syndrome.
Table 87.2  Adapted from KDIGO 2024 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic
kidney disease.
Establishing a cause of CKD
Physical examination
Look for signs of systemic disease or weight loss. Volume assessment, percussing for
palpable bladder, blood pressure (including postural measurements), listening for a
pericardial rub or renal bruit.
Medication history
Newly started medications and correlations with renal function; focus on penicillinbased antibiotics (risk of TIN), proton pump inhibitors (risk of TIN), non-steroidal agents
(risk of ATN, TIN, membranous nephropathy), medications acting on the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis (can cause haemodynamic changes within the kidney,
causing decreased filtration (often acceptably so and then associated with renal
protection)).
Identifying urinary tract
abnormalities
Lower urinary symptoms (frequency, dysuria), macroscopic haematuria, obstructive
symptoms (hesitancy, poor stream, terminal dribbling), strangury. Also, focus on
changes in quantity of urine passed and nocturia.
Eliciting signs and
symptoms of systemic
diseases
Seek out symptoms and signs of connective tissue disorders, lupus, vasculitis, especially
in at-risk patients. Remember non-specific symptoms of weight loss, lethargy, night
sweats are often a dominant feature of presentation.
Eliciting signs and
symptoms of common
diseases causing renal
dysfunction
Diabetes: age at onset, type, anti-diabetic drugs and their history, glycaemic control,
macro- and microvascular complications (especially retinopathy). Hypertension: age at
onset, degree of control, number of agents needed for control, evidence of end-organ
damage (encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy), evidence of complications (retinopathy,
strokes), investigation of secondary causes.
Detailed family history
Pedigree to map out mode of inheritance, genetic testing in family members, age at
onset, degree to which family members are affected by condition, extra-renal
manifestations (e.g. sensorineural deafness with Alport’s, intracranial aneurysms with
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney diseases).
Detailed social history
Other than helping to build rapport with patient, will inform the management options
offered to the patient in terms of renal replacement therapy. Useful to identify
environmental triggers to certain conditions (e.g. smoking for anti-GBM disease)
Bedside investigations
Urinalysis: active urinary sediment guides one towards glomerular inflammation,
proteinuria crucial for diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome. Bladder scan: useful to identify
retention.
Formal laboratory
investigations
Identifying anaemia, renal bone disease, secondary hyperparathyroidism (all signs of
relative chronicity); non-invasive acute renal screen (ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM, serum
electrophoresis, light chain ratio, immunoglobulin and complement levels), urinary
proteinuria quantification and electrophoresis.
Imaging
US or CT KUB – to identify size, number of kidneys, corticomedullary differentiation,
hydronephrosis. CT or MR angiogram to assess renal vessels if indicated.
Kidney biopsy
Gold standard for diagnosis of various intrinsic renal conditions.

<!-- page:632 -->
Chronic kidney disease, including end-stage kidney disease
613
•	 Eliciting a detailed family history is critically important in diagnosing familial conditions such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. If there is a ‘positive’ family history, a pedigree of affected
family members will be useful in identifying the mode of inheritance and can guide further imaging and
genetic analysis.
•	 The judicious use of various bedside and laboratory tests and evaluation techniques can yield clues as to
the cause of CKD:
•	 Imaging, obtained promptly, is essential to rule out bladder outflow obstruction or upper urinary tract
obstruction, both of which can present with CKD. The presence, size, symmetry, and morphology of kidneys can be appreciated via an ultrasound or cross-sectional imaging techniques such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. Ultrasonography is safe and imminently useful but requires a skilled
operator, and its utility may be limited by the patient’s body habitus. An unenhanced computed tomography scan of the kidneys, ureter and bladder can act as a substitute. Where indicated, renal arteries and
veins can be specifically imaged via CT or MR angiograms as ultrasound is not typically diagnostic.
•	 Urinalysis is a cheap, widely available test which can be obtained at the point of care. The presence of
blood and protein on urinalysis can bring into play various intrinsic renal diseases, thus alerting the assessing clinician of the need to involve nephrology services early.
•	 Quantification of proteinuria is advisable if there is proteinuria on urinalysis. Urine albumin:creatinine
ratio measurements are used widely. A 24 hour collection is rarely necessary. In certain cases, non-albumin
proteinuria (light-chain cast nephropathy, tubular proteinuria) can account for the majority of proteinuria
and for this reason, sending urine for both albumin:creatinine ratio and protein:creatinine ratio is
advisable.
•	 Serological tests are particularly helpful in diagnosing various causes of CKD due to systemic and intrinsic renal diseases and the history, examination and urinalysis should be used to determine which tests
need to be sent. In patients with microscopic haematuria and/or macroscopic proteinuria with CKD consideration should be given in liaison with renal services to sending a renal acute screen including: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) antibodies, serum free light chains, serum and urine protein electrophoresis, immunoglobulin and complement (C3 and C4) levels alongside more routine biochemistry. Active infection, if
suspected, should be sought with blood cultures and further investigations targeting the potential source
(e.g. echocardiogram for potential infective endocarditis). Anti-streptolysin O titre is useful in diagnosing
post-infection glomerulonephritis.
Managing complications of CKD
•	 It is important to note at the outset that most CKD is asymptomatic until at an advanced stage and discovered incidentally in primary or secondary care.
•	 Patients with CKD are more susceptible to acute kidney injury (AKI), and the investigation and management
of AKI remains largely the same in spite of the presence of underlying renal dysfunction. Such acute-onchronic kidney injury (AoCKI) as well as advanced chronic kidney disease (stage IV and V) can be associated with some specific management concerns, outlined below:
•	 Hypovolaemia leading to hypotension due to numerous reasons can lead to AoCKI and judicious fluid
resuscitation with a temporary halting of diuretics and medications with haemodynamic effects on the
kidney is indicated. If crystalloid boluses are used for fluid resuscitation, repeated fluid balance assessments and urine output monitoring should be used to guide fluid replacement with small boluses being
used where there is uncertainty.

<!-- page:633 -->
614
Acute Medicine
•	 Fluid overload can occur in AoCKI if the patient becomes oliguric/anuric. The value of an accurate
fluid balance assessment, repeated at regular intervals to guide fluid management, cannot be underestimated. This involves assessment of thirst, assessing mucous membranes, skin turgor, assessing the
jugular venous pressure remaining mindful of potential right heart failure or valvular disease which can
confound this assessment, peripheral oedema (which tends to be pedal in ambulant patients and
sacral in bed-bound patients) and auscultation and imaging of the lung fields to identify pulmonary
oedema. Regular patient weights and monitoring of urine output are indispensable for guiding diuresis in
such cases. Managing acute pulmonary oedema is described elsewhere (Chapter 47). Patients with
existing CKD may already be on high doses of diuretics to manage their fluid balance. If an acute insult
renders them anuric, renal replacement therapy will be needed urgently; early involvement of nephrology services would be prudent. Where patients retain some urine output and sufficient blood pressure,
a trial of higher-than-usual dose of loop diuretic might be helpful as a temporising measure (higher
doses are required in AKI and CKD to meet a diuretic threshold). Heart disease often co-exists with
renal disease and concomitant assessment of the heart with an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram is recommended.
•	 Hyperkalaemia can be life threatening and typically occurs due to reduced renal potassium excretion by
the failing kidney but also due to the acidosis which tends to dominate. Emergent management of hyperkalaemia as outlined in Chapter 25 is recommended with a particular focus on cessation of agents promoting hyperkalaemia, typically those affecting the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis. Where acidosis
exists, intravenous bicarbonate can encourage transcellular movement of potassium into cells and high
doses of loop diuretics can aid a kaliuresis. Ultimately, renal replacement therapy will need to be
considered.
•	 Uraemic complications include uraemic encephalopathy, pericarditis or gastritis. The symptoms of uraemia are non-specific and attribution of confusion to uraemia can result in diagnostic over-shadowing and
missing other more convincing contributory factors such as delirium, intracranial pathology, sepsis, other
metabolic and electrolyte abnormalities. Evidence of mental slowness will be obvious in the course of
history-taking and often, a collateral is useful in shedding light on hitherto unappreciated cognitive
decline. Tests of cognitive function and attention are useful in quantifying cognitive decline. Pericarditis
and uraemic pericardial effusions can be diagnosed with an electrocardiogram and an echocardiogram,
respectively. A pericardial rub in the context of uraemia warrants urgent renal advice. Ultimately, the presence of suspected complications of advanced uraemia necessitates renal replacement therapy. Patients
with CKD are more prone to gastrointestinal bleeding and prompt recognition of this in the context of a
disproportionate urea rise is key.
Contrast nephropathy
•	 The use of iodinated contrast media is thought to cause, in certain vulnerable individuals, a transient, nonoliguric reversible AKI.
•	 The proposed underlying mechanisms include vasoconstriction causing medullary hypoxia, direct tubular
toxicity and altered levels of various vasoactive mediators.
•	 The risk of AKI should certainly be assessed and mitigated before offering iodinated contrast media to
adults, but this must not delay emergency or essential contrast imaging.
•	 Increased risk is associated with:
•	 eGFR less than 40 mL/min/1.73 m2
•	 Diabetic with eGFR less than 40 mL/min/1.73 m2
•	 Heart failure
•	 Renal transplant

<!-- page:634 -->
Chronic kidney disease, including end-stage kidney disease
615
•	 Age 75 and over
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Increased volume of contrast agent
•	 Intra-arterial administration of contrast medium with first-pass renal exposure
•	 Historically, the literature on contrast media nephrotoxicity has been limited due to a lack of adequate and
robust control groups and a failure to adequately account for significant predisposing risk factors when making comparisons between patients with CKD who were administered contrast or spared contrast.
•	 A relatively recent meta-analysis analysed propensity score-matched pairs obtained from 21 cohort studies
finding no increased risk for AKI, dialysis or mortality after contrast-enhanced CT among patients with eGFR
>45 mL/min/1.73 m2. The use of multivariable logistic regression identified an association between eGFR
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and AKI, but even here the absolute increase in risk in patients exposed to contrast
compared to those who were not was low (19% versus 15%).
•	 There is no convincing evidence for the use of N-acetylcysteine to prevent or mitigate contrast-associated AKI.
•	 Volume expansion, via the intravenous or oral route, is sometimes recommended and this is not unreasonable, but the volume and rate of crystalloid infusion must be guided by the patient’s fluid balance and not
given without thought.
Anaemia in patients with CKD/ESKD
•	 Anaemia is invariably associated with advanced CKD and ESKD and is typically a result of attenuated erythropoietin reserve in the diseased kidneys alongside a functional iron deficiency.
•	 The degree of anaemia correlates with the stages of CKD such that most patients with CKD G4 and higher
tend be on some form of erythropoiesis-stimulating therapy (ESA). Iron replacement can be via the oral route
in less advanced CKD with the intravenous route often required for higher stages of CKD and for ESKD.
•	 The adjustment of ESA and iron doses is usually the preserve of outpatient nephrology with a target haemoglobin of 100–120 g/L.
•	 When patients with CKD/ESKD present acutely unwell in a general medicine setting, they can be anaemic
(or more anaemic than usual) for a number of reasons including bleeding from a hitherto unknown source,
sepsis, haemolysis, abnormalities of bone marrow, etc. As such, a comprehensive medical history, examination and appropriate supplementary investigations (elemental iron, transferrin saturation, ferritin, LDH, haptoglobin, reticulocyte count, blood film, B12, folate, etc.) are often required to tease out the contributory
factors for a new and/or worsening anaemia in an otherwise stable patient with CKD/ESKD.
•	 Once such reversible causes have been considered and ruled out, iron and ESA doses can then be adjusted
in conjunction with the patient’s overseeing nephrologist.
•	 For patients with an ongoing acute driver for anaemia, such as active bleeding necessitating urgent surgery
or a haemolytic process, there may be no choice but to transfuse blood as this is the only means of rapidly
correcting haemoglobin (ESA therapy adjustments take a few weeks to have an effect).
•	 For patients with CKD/ESKD who are candidates for a transplant in the future, the immune-sensitising effect
of a red cell transfusion must be considered, and it would always be wise to involve the patient’s nephrologist in such discussions unless in an emergency situation.
Comprehensive conservative care in patients with CKD
•	 The increasing prevalence of CKD in elderly, frail and heavily co-morbid patient populations has necessitated
a focus on so-called comprehensive conservative care.
•	 Comprehensive conservative care is an encompassing term which includes delaying progression of CKD,
minimising complications of CKD and engaging in detailed communications with patients and their families

<!-- page:635 -->
616
Acute Medicine
on goals of treatment, advanced care planning, including the provision of psychological support, as required.
Crucially, it does not involve the provision of renal replacement therapy.
•	 There are two main scenarios where renal replacement therapy may not be considered:
•	 Stable: This refers to the elderly patient presenting to nephrology clinic or a medical setting with CKD diagnosed either in primary care or discovered incidentally, with a significant burden of medical co-morbidities
(such as heart failure or ischaemic heart disease), significant frailty and/or cognitive and functional impairment or the presence of pre-existing conditions which curtails life expectancy (e.g. disseminated malignancy). Alternatively, it could also refer to the patient for whom the physical, psychological, and
time-related burdens of renal replacement therapy are simply incompatible with the maintenance of their
quality of life.
•	 Critically ill: This is where a critical illness has rendered a patient acutely in need of renal replacement
therapy. In some cases, due to chronic disease burden and/or frailty, the impact of potentially long-term
dialysis on quality of life is felt to be unacceptable. The prospect of renal recovery is often uncertain.
Patients may not be physiologically able, in acute illness, to tolerate the haemodynamic challenges of renal
replacement therapy meaning it is not considered to be an option. In many cases, the patient may not
wish for invasive access procedures or dialysis to be performed. In other situations they may be willing to
tolerate renal replacement therapy if recovery is a short term meaningful prospect but not otherwise and
a time limited period of dialysis is occasionally used with ongoing review.
•	 Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) suggest comprehensive conservative care should be
introduced as a viable treatment option for patients who are unlikely to benefit from dialysis.
•	  In one of the larger studies in this area to date in stable CKD, Chandna et al studied 844 patients over an
18 year period (82% treated by RRT and 18% conservatively) and found that median survival (gauged from
onset of stage V CKD) was 21.2 months in the conservative care group versus 67.1 months in the RRT group.
However, this survival advantage was reduced to 4 months for those over 75 years, once age,
comorbidity and diabetes were corrected for.
•	 In a general medicine setting, the elderly, frail and/or co-morbid patient presenting with CKD (either incidentally discovered or in association with an acute illness), presents arguably an even greater challenge in terms
of discussing prognosis and the utility of RRT in terms of its impact on survival and quality of life.
•	 The early involvement of a nephrologist to aid the caretaking team in undertaking these delicate, emotionally charged discussions in an acute situation is essential unless the patients does not wish to consider
RRT or the clinical judgment that RRT is inappropriate is clear.
•	 Once a decision to pursue comprehensive conservative care has been agreed by all parties, there will need
to be an open dialogue between the nephrology or treating team, local palliative care, including hospicelevel care if needed, the patient, their family and primary care to enact a robust plan for the management
of symptoms. This should be undertaken wherever possible in the patients location of choice.
Further reading
Chandna SM, Da Silva-Gane M, Marshall C, et al. (2011) Survival of elderly patients with stage 5 CKD:
comparison of conservative management and renal replacement therapy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 26(5),
1608–1614.
Davison SN, Levin A, Moss AH, et al. (2015) Executive summary of the KDIGO controversies conference on
supportive care in chronic kidney disease: developing a roadmap to improving quality care. Kidney Int
88(3), 447–459.

<!-- page:636 -->
Chronic kidney disease, including end-stage kidney disease
617
Levin A, Ahmed SB, Carrero JJ, et al. (2024) Executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease: known knowns and known
unknowns. Kidney Int 105(4), 684–701.
Mullasari A, Victor SM. (2014) Update on contrast induced nephropathy. EJ ESC Counc Cardiol Pract 13, 4.
Murtagh FE, Burns A, Moranne O, et al. (2016) Supportive care: comprehensive conservative care in
end-stage kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 11(10), 1909–1914.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellent (2013) 2023 exceptional surveillance of acute kidney injury:
prevention, detection and management (NICE guideline NG148). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
NG148/documents/162
Obed M, Gabriel MM, Dumann E, et al. (2022) Risk of acute kidney injury after contrast-enhanced
computerized tomography: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 21 propensity score–matched cohort
studies. Eur Radiol 32(12), 8432–8442.
Stevens PE, Ahmed SB, Carrero JJ, et al. (2024) KDIGO 2024 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and
management of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 105(4), S117–S314.
