# CHAPTER 88 Renal tubular disorders

- Pages: 637-643
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:637 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
618
Priorities
The renal tubule processes glomerular filtrate and regulates homeostasis of fluid, electrolytes and pH. Apart
from acute tubular injury (ATI), renal tubular disorders are rare, but can present to the general medical take and
should be considered as part of the differential in people with unexplained electrolyte, acid base or complex
renal stone disorders.
Tubular disorders may be inherited or acquired, and cause electrolyte imbalances that need supplementation
and dietary/lifestyle changes. Presentations depend on the underlying defect.
Suspected inherited or acquired tubular disorders should usually be discussed with or referred to Nephrology
for further investigation and on-going management. Where a genetic cause is suspected, discuss with
Nephrology or Clinical Genetics service. In the United Kingdom, panel testing for renal tubulopathy and tubular acidosis genes is available (see links at end of this section).
Acute tubular injury (ATI)
Pathophysiology: The commonest tubular disorder and most commonly caused by ischaemia due to pre-renal
acute kidney injury (AKI, Chapter 86), it is self-limiting unless cortical or tubular necrosis occurs. The former
can result in chronic kidney disease (CKD) or renal replacement therapy (RRT) dependence and the latter in
acquired Fanconi’s syndrome (see below).
Presentation: Persistent renal impairment after precipitating illness has resolved. Urine will typically not contain
blood and protein (but catheterised samples can mislead). May take days-weeks to resolve.
Key investigations: Urine dipstick, renal US to exclude obstruction, screen for other causes of AKI (Chapter 25).
Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) >1% is suggestive of tubular rather than pre-renal injury but not
reliable. When injury persists, renal biopsy may exclude other pathology.
Management: Removing precipitating cause, ensuring euvolaemia and treating infection, and supportive care,
including renal replacement therapy (RRT). Suspected ATI that does not respond to initial and supportive
measures should be discussed with nephrology.
Disorders by segment
Specific tubular disorders are now considered by tubular segment (Figure 88.1).
Renal tubular disorders
Michael Turner and Katherine R. Bull
CHAPTER 88

<!-- page:638 -->
Renal tubular disorders
619
The proximal convoluted tubule
The proximal convoluted tubule is responsible for most reabsorption of essential metabolites. Due to high rates
of aerobic metabolism, the proximal tubule is sensitive to insults such as hypoperfusion, mitochondrial disorders or heavy metals.
Fanconi’s syndrome
Pathophysiology: Fanconi’s syndrome describes impaired proximal reabsorption of sodium, potassium, phosphate, amino acids, glucose and bicarbonate. This causes metabolic acidosis, hypokalaemia and hypophosphataemia. Genetic causes underly most paediatric cases. Acquired causes dominate in adults, including ATI,
lead and cadmium poisoning, myeloma, amyloidosis, Sjögren’s syndrome and medications such as tenofovir
and aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Presentation: In childhood, delayed growth and rickets, plus features related to underlying cause, e.g. neurological impairment in Wilson’s disease. Adults may present with symptoms of osteomalacia or muscle weakness, or with incidental urine and blood abnormalities.
Investigations: Paired urine and serum pH, phosphate, potassium, sodium and glucose levels may reveal hypokalaemia, hypophosphataemia and hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis. Glycosuria and generalised aminoaciduria are expected. Screen for monoclonal gammopathy. Isolated glycosuria in the absence of diabetes
mellitus can be due to pregnancy, or mutations in the SGLT2 channel. Differential may include Vitamin D or
calcium deficiencies, see also hypophosphatemia syndromes and renal tubular acidosis (RTA), below.
Management: Treat underlying cause if acquired. Potassium citrate treats both hypokalaemia and acidosis.
Phosphate and vitamin D supplementation are also required (alfacalcidol since hydroxylation may be
impaired). Intercurrent illnesses may severely dehydrate people with Fanconi’s syndrome, low threshold for
IV fluids.
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
See RTA below.
Proximal Convoluted Tubule
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
Fanconi’s syndrome
Hypophosphataemic syndromes
Loop of Henle
Bartter’s syndrome
Collecting duct
Liddle’s syndrome
Diabetes insipidus
Distal renal tubular acidosis
Distal Convoluted Tubule
Gitelman’s syndrome
Gordon’s syndrome
Figure 88.1  Segments of the kidney tubule and selected conditions affecting them. Source: Adapted from Walsh
and Unwin, Clin Med (Lond) 2012/Royal College of Physicians.

<!-- page:639 -->
620
Acute Medicine
Hypophosphataemia syndromes
Pathophysiology: Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is released by osteocytes when calcitriol and phosphate
levels are high and promotes urinary phosphate wasting. Genetic variants affecting FGF23, vitamin D or
tubular phosphate channels may cause phosphate wasting.
Acquired tubular phosphate-wasting can be caused by vitamin D deficiency (dietary, lack of sun exposure),
primary, secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Hypophosphataemia is a side effect of intravenous iron
infusion, particularly Ferric carboxymaltose, due to FGF23 stabilisation. FGF23-mimicking proteins can be
produced by tumours causing oncogenic osteomalacia.
The non-renal differential for hypophosphataemia includes gastrointestinal (malnutrition, reduced absorption,
alcoholism), and increased intracellular phosphate sequestration (refeeding syndrome, haematological
malignancy and diabetic ketoacidosis).
Presentation: Hypophosphataemia and rickets in childhood. Weakness, confusion, muscle and bone pain in
acquired forms. Nephrocalcinosis or stones due to hypercalciuria when vitamin D is elevated.
Investigations: Serum and urine phosphate levels. ionised calcium levels, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), parathyroid hormone (PTH), measurement of 25(OH) vitamin D and where available consider 1,25(OH) vitamin D
and FGF23 dependent on initial results. Consider imaging for malignancy in acquired forms.
Management: Phosphate and calcitriol supplementation. Treatment of underlying cause.
The loop of Henle
The loop on Henle establishes the corticomedullary counter current which allows urinary concentration.
Bartter’s syndrome
Pathophysiology: Results from loss of sodium and chloride reabsorption due to autosomal recessive mutations
in SLC12A1, encoding NKCC2 (type 1), KCNJ1 (type 2), CLCLNKB (type 3), CLCNKA and CLCNKB (type 4b)
or BSND (type 4a).
Presentation: Bartter’s syndrome type 1, 2 and 4 present antenatally with polyhydramnios and lethargy. Type
3 may present in adolescence or early adulthood with hypokalaemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesaemia
and hypercalciuria. Patients prefer salty snacks. Blood pressure is low-normal. Hypercalciuria can lead to
nephrocalcinosis or stones.
Investigations: Paired urine and serum pH, potassium, sodium, chloride and calcium will show hypokalaemic
metabolic alkalosis, with high fractional urinary excretion of potassium, calcium and chloride. Urinary tract
US shows nephrocalcinosis in type 1, 2 and sometimes 3.
Management: By a nephrologist or experienced clinical biochemist. Encourage a salty diet, slow-release potassium chloride. If blood pressure permits, potassium-sparing diuretics may be useful, but caution is needed
because of the risk of hypovolaemia. NSAIDs have been used (to suppress prostaglandin) but may increase
the risk of CKD. Often it is not feasible to achieve potassium levels in the normal range. Intercurrent illnesses
can result in serious dehydration so low threshold for IV rehydration. Anaesthesia needs careful planning.
Pregnancy, particularly if hyperemesis occurs, can present additional risks.
Distal convoluted tubule
Reabsorbs sodium and chloride, as well as magnesium and calcium via transcellular mechanisms.
Gitelman’s syndrome
Pathophysiology: loss of function mutations in the thiazide receptor (Na+/Cl− channel NCC) in the distal convoluted tubule.
Presentation: Mild hypotension, hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, metabolic alkalosis and hypocalciuria
(unlike hypercalciuria in Bartter’s syndrome). Symptoms are variable, but may include lethargy, tetany,
paraesthesia, and polydipsia. Often diagnosed in adolescence or adulthood. Take a detailed and sensitive

<!-- page:640 -->
Renal tubular disorders
621
history exploring eating disorders, laxative and diuretic abuse. Proton pump inhibitors can cause
hypomagnesaemia.
Investigations: Serum potassium and magnesium are low, and serum bicarbonate high, with low urine
calcium:creatinine ratio. Urine chloride may distinguish from gastrointestinal (GI) potassium loss (urinary
chloride is inappropriately high in Gitelman’s syndrome). If blood pressure is high consider hyperaldosteronism and check cortisol, aldosterone and renin. Exclude hyperthyroidism which can cause low potassium.
Management: Encourage a salty diet. The need for electrolyte supplements varies, but slow-release oral potassium and magnesium supplements are typically required. Aim for K > 3 mmol/L and Mg > 0.6 mmol/L.
Potassium will be difficult to correct unless hypomagnesaemia treated. Magnesium supplements can cause
GI symptoms, Mg lactate may be better tolerated than Mg glycerophosphate. Intercurrent illnesses can
result in serious dehydration so low threshold for IV rehydration.
Gordon’s syndrome (pseudohypoaldosteronism type II)
Pathophysiology: The mirror image of Gitelman’s syndrome, caused by activation of the thiazide receptor.
Presentation: Na+ and Cl- retention with hypertension, metabolic acidosis, hypercalciuria may present as kidney
stones. Differential includes autosomal recessive 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (apparent
mineralocorticoid excess), which itself can be mimicked by excessive liquorice intake.
Investigation: Consider and investigate for other causes of hypertension. Genetic testing for WNK4 and
HSD11B2 gene mutations. CT KUB if renal colic present.
Management: Responds well to thiazide diuretics.
The collecting duct
The collecting duct comprises principal cells which reabsorb water and sodium and secrete potassium, and
intercalated cells which secrete bicarbonate or H+.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Pathophysiology: Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is released in response to hypertonic serum and binds V2 receptors in the collecting ducts. This increases water reabsorption, maintaining serum osmolality and concentrating urine. Failure of the kidney to respond to ADH is nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI). Failure of posterior
pituitary ADH secretion is central DI. Both cause polyuria and polydipsia.
Nephrogenic DI is most commonly acquired, due to lithium toxicity or hypercalcaemia. Rarely, nephrogenic DI
is inherited due to variants in AVPR2 (X-linked) and AQP2.
Presentation: Polyuria and polydipsia, with polyuria persisting and marked dehydration when access to water
is restricted (e.g. by illness and/or hospital admission). Other causes of polyuria (e.g. diuretic use, diabetes
mellitus, post-obstructive diuresis and psychogenic polydipsia) should be excluded.
Investigation: Urine osmolality will be low (<300 mOsm). Serum osmolality is high (>300 mOsm) when access
to water is insufficient. A water deprivation test can demonstrate this. A desmopressin challenge will differentiate central from nephrogenic DI.
Management: Treat precipitating conditions. Plentiful access to fluids, ensure adequate supplementary fluid is
given when illness prevents patients from drinking freely (e.g. peri-operatively). Thiazide diuretics help limit
hypernatraemia.
Liddle’s syndrome
Pathophysiology: Genetic variants prevent vesicular sequestration of ENaC, resulting in unregulated sodium
reabsorption and hypertension. Corresponding effluxes of potassium and protons into the tubular lumen
drive hypokalaemia and metabolic alkalosis.
Presentation: Resistant hypertension, metabolic alkalosis and hypokalaemia.
Investigation: Serum pH and potassium level. Blood pressure. Measure renin aldosterone ratio. Trial of amiloride. Genetic testing should include SCNN1A, SCNN1B and SCNN1G, coding for the ENaC subunits.
Management: Treatment with amiloride achieves good outcomes.

<!-- page:641 -->
622
Acute Medicine
Distal renal tubular acidosis
See below.
Renal tubular acidoses
Endogenous production, combined with animal protein-containing diets, results in net gain of acid, requiring
renal excretion of hydrogen ions. Additionally, the kidneys must reabsorb the large amount of filtered bicarbonate. RTA disorders are caused by failures of acid-base handling at varying points in the tubule.
General points about the investigation of suspected RTA
Normal anion gap (Na+ – (Cl− + HCO3−)) metabolic acidosis with elevated urine pH may suggest RTA, but
exclude urinary tract infection or severe volume depletion. Trans-tubular potassium gradient, fractional excretion of potassium, or urine potassium to creatinine ratio, when measured in the context of hypokalaemia, off
supplementation, can help distinguish inappropriate renal potassium wasting from non-renal causes. Take a
careful history including diuretic or laxative use and eating disorders, which can present with hypokalaemia
and either acidosis or alkalosis.
Type 1 (distal)
Pathophysiology: Distal RTA (dRTA) results from failure of H+ secretion in the distal tubule. It can be due to
autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in the anion exchanger 1, which may be accompanied by spherocytosis. Autosomal recessive dRTA is due to genes encoding the H+ATPase (which pumps H+ into the tubular
lumen), sometimes associated with sensorineural deafness. dRTA is more commonly acquired, e.g. in autoimmune disease, particularly Sjögren’s syndrome or systemic lupus erythematosus – or secondary to chronic
obstructive uropathy, drugs (e.g. cyclosporin A, amphotericin B, and lithium- see also diabetes insipidus),
sickle cell anaemia and renal transplant.
Presentation: Failure to thrive, rickets, fatigue and weakness. Kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis may occur.
Features of the underlying cause.
Investigations: Blood tests show hypokalaemic metabolic acidosis. Blood film may show spherocytes with
SLC4A1 variants. Anti-nuclear antibodies and autoimmune screen. Renal US for nephrocalcinosis and stones.
Partial RTA, where acidaemia is only apparent with challenge, can be detected with a furosemide fludrocortisone urine acidification test.
Management: Potassium citrate supplementation treats acidosis and hypokalaemia. Sodium bicarbonate supplementation may also be needed. Correction of acidosis may lead to normalisation of potassium. Risk of
osteoporosis if inadequately treated in adults. Management of any underlying autoimmune disorder.
Type 2 (proximal)
Pathophysiology: Proximal RTA (pRTA) rarely occurs due to isolated bicarbonate reabsorption defects
which may be due to genetic variation in the Na+/HCO3
− co-transporter gene (SLC4A4) or medications
(topiramate or carbonic anhydrase inhibitors). They most commonly occur as part of Fanconi syndrome
(see above).
Failure of bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule can be partially compensated for in the TALH and
collecting duct, so acidaemia is often less marked than in dRTA.
Presentation: Failure to thrive, rickets, fatigue and weakness. Kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis may occur.
Investigations: Blood tests show hypokalaemic metabolic acidosis. Investigate for features of a more generalised proximal defect (see Fanconi’s syndrome above).
Management: High doses of alkali are often needed as supplemented filtered bicarbonate load will exceed
proximal reabsorptive capacity. Potassium citrate treats both acidosis and hypokalaemia.

<!-- page:642 -->
Renal tubular disorders
623
Type 3 (mixed)
Type 3 RTA can be considered as combined proximal and distal RTA due to mutations in carbonic anhydrase
2 and is exceedingly rare. It combines features of type 1 and type 2 and has a profound acidaemia.
Type 4 (aldosterone deficiency/hyperkalaemic RTA)
Pathophysiology: Hypoaldosteronism results in less sodium reabsorption in the collecting duct and
consequently less H+ excretion and potassium loss in the urine. Causes include adrenal insufficiency or
hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism due to kidney damage (frequently caused by diabetic nephropathy,
NSAIDs or calcineurin inhibitors).
Presentation: Patients may experience weakness, lethargy and hypotension. Hyperpigmentation suggests
adrenal insufficiency (including autoimmune Addison’s disease) with elevated adrenocorticotrophic
hormone and melanocyte-stimulating hormone.
Investigations: Blood tests show hyperkalaemic metabolic acidosis. Urine sodium remains high on a sodiumrestricted diet. Renin and aldosterone levels distinguish primary from secondary hypoaldosteronism. Review
drug history for potassium-sparing diuretics, ACE inhibitors or Angiotensin II receptor blockers.
Management: Fludrocortisone treats the mineralocorticoid deficiency and hyperkalaemia. However, in CKD
fludrocortisone may exacerbate fluid retention and hypertension. Low potassium diet and loop or thiazide
diuretics may be used in addition or as an alternative in this context. If required, glucocorticoids can be given
for more generalised adrenal insufficiency.
Common presentations of tubular disease
Presentation
Renal causes
Non-renal causes
Key first-line tests
Hyperkalaemia
Reduced glomerular filtration
(AKI and/or CKD), type 4 renal
tubular acidosis.
Cell lysis (tumour lysis syndrome
and rhabdomyolysis), increased
potassium intake, iatrogenic,
Artefactual (sample haemolysis).
U and Es, bone profile,
blood gas for pH, LDH, CK.
Hypokalaemia
Bartter’s, Fanconi’s, Gitelman’s
and Liddle’s syndromes, renal
tubular acidosis (types 1-3),
loop diuretic overuse.
Malnutrition, GI losses, excess
insulin, beta-agonist use.
U and Es, blood gas analysis,
serum glucose, C-peptide,
urine chloride.
Fractional excretion of
potassium, measured off
supplements when serum K
low.
Acidosis
AKI, CKD, Gordon’s syndrome,
renal tubular acidosis.
Hypoventilation, diarrhoeal illnesses,
laxative over-use, hyperlactataemia
(tissue hypoxia and metformin),
diabetic ketoacidosis, Poisoning.
Blood gas analysis (arterial if
raised pCO2 suspected),
U and Es, bone profile,
ketones, Urinary pH and
chloride, Anion gap.
Alkalosis
Bartter’s, Gitelman’s and
Liddle’s syndromes
Vomiting, hyperventilation,
hypovolaemia (contraction alkalosis)
Blood gas analysis (arterial if
decreased pCO2 suspected)
Polyuria
Nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus, diuretic over-use,
post-obstructive diuresis,
osmotic diuresis (e.g.
hypercalcaemia)
Psychogenic polydipsia, central and
gestational diabetes insipidus,
diabetes mellitus.
U and Es, bone profile,
glucose (+/− ketones)

<!-- page:643 -->
624
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Downie ML, Garcia SC, Kleta R, Bockenhauer D. (2021) Inherited tubulopathies of the kidney: insights from
genetics. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 16(4), 620–630.
European Rare Kidney Disease Reference Network Guidelines and Pathways: Tubulopathies https://www.
erknet.org/guidelines-pathways/tubulopathies.
Gallagher H, Soar J, Tomson C. (2016) New guideline for perioperative management of people with inherited
salt-wasting alkaloses. Br J Anaesth 116(6), 746–749.
Walsh SB, Unwin RJ. (2012) Renal tubular disorders. Clin Med J 12, 476.
Genetic Testing
Eligibility Criteria: https://www.england.nhs.uk/publication/national-genomic-test-directories/.
Renal tubular panel: https://nhsgms-panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/292/v4.0.
