# CHAPTER 91 Acute arthritis

- Pages: 662-664
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:662 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
643
Arthralgia in the strictest sense refers to joint pain without swelling, while arthritis signifies joint pain with
swelling. In acute mono-arthritis, exclusion of septic arthritis is the immediate priority. Acute oligo- or polyarthritis has a broad differential diagnosis (Table 91.1), and if it has persisted >six weeks, is unlikely to resolve
spontaneously and needs urgent referral to a rheumatologist. Assessment of the patient with acute arthritis is
summarized in Figure 91.1. Focussed assessment of an acute arthritis is important and this is highlighted in
Table 91.2. The relevant investigations that should follow the clinical assessment carried out are detailed in
Table 91.3. The management of an acute arthritis ensures that the patient has the required intervention as
soon as possible and the steps to take depending on the underlying diagnosis is highlighted in Table 91.4.
Acute arthritis
Kehinde Sunmboye
CHAPTER 91
Table 91.1  Causes of acute arthritis.
Cause
Monoarthritis
Usually oligoarthritis
(2–4 joints)
Usually polyarthritis (5 or more
joints)
Common
Septic arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Gout, Pseudogout
Inflammatory bowel disease
Trauma*
Viral diseases (e.g. rubella, hepatitis B
and C, infectious mononucleosis)
Haemarthrosis secondary
to anticoagulation
Reactive arthritis following
gut or genitourinary infection
Flare of osteoarthritis
(overuse or minor trauma)
Psoriatic arthritis
Endocarditis (acute synovitis
or tenosynovitis)
Uncommon
or rare
Osteonecrosis
Sarcoidosis
Post-streptococcal infection
Pigmented villonodular
synovitis
Whipple disease
Leukaemia
Vasculitis
Tuberculosis
Syphilis
Haemophilia
Adult Still’s disease
Palindromic
Familial
Rheumatism
Mediterranean fever
* Causing internal derangement, haemarthrosis or fracture, or acute synovitis from penetrating injury.

<!-- page:663 -->
644
Acute Medicine
Yes
No
Yes
No
Acute arthritis (Table 91.1)
Key observations (Table 2.1)
Focused assessment (Table 91.2)
Urgent investigation (Table 91.3)
One joint or more than one joint involved?
More than one joint
Urgent rheumatology opinion
One joint
Cause known?
Treat cause
(Table 91.1)
Joint aspiration
(Chapter 111)
Organisms on Gram stain or
high probability of septic arthritis?
Start IV antibiotic
therapy (Table 91.1)
Urgent orthopaedic/
rheumatology opinion
Treat with non-steroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drug
Rheumatology opinion
Further management
directed by diagnosis
(Table 91.5)
Figure 91.1  Assessment of the patient with acute arthritis.
Table 91.2  Focused assessment of acute arthritis.
History
•	 Duration and time course of arthritis and other symptoms (e.g. fever, rash, diarrhoea, urethritis and uveitis).
•	 Known arthritis or prosthetic joint?
•	 Previous similar attacks of arthritis?
•	 History of trauma?
•	 Possible septic arthritis? Septic arthritis usually follows a bacteraemia (e.g. from IV drug use) in a patient at risk
because of rheumatoid arthritis, the presence of a prosthetic joint or immunocompromised individuals.
•	 Risk of gonococcal arthritis?
•	 Other illness?
•	 Current medication
Examination
•	 Key observations plus systematic examination.
•	 Pattern of joint involvement: monoarthritis, oligoarthritis (two to four joints) or polyarthritis (five joints or more) (see
Table 91.1).
•	 Arthritis or periarticular inflammation (bursitis, tendinitis or cellulitis)? Painful limitation of movement of the joint
suggests arthritis.
•	 Extra-articular signs (e.g. fever, rash, mouth ulcers, anterior uveitis and urethritis).

<!-- page:664 -->
Acute arthritis
645
Further reading
Carlin E, Flew S. (2016) Sexually acquired reactive arthritis. Clin Med 16, 193–196. http://www.clinmed.
rcpjournal.org/content/16/2/193.full.pdf+html.
Helfgott SM. (2015) Overview of monoarthritis in adults. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/
overview-of-monoarthritis-in-adults?source=search_result&search=acute%20arthritis&selectedTitle=
2∼150.
Senthelal S, Li J, Ardeshirzadeh S, Thomas MA. (2024) Arthritis. In: StatPearls. [Online], Singh JA (Ed).
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK518992/. [Accessed: 8 May 2024].
Smolen JS, Aletaha D, McInnes IB. (2016) Rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 388, 2023–2038.
Table 91.3  Urgent investigation in acute arthritis.
•	 Joint aspiration (Chapter 111)
•	 Blood culture (×2) (especially if septic arthritis is suspected)
•	 Blood glucose
•	 Creatinine and electrolytes
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Full blood count
•	 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
•	 Viral serology if indicated
•	 X-ray joint for baseline and to exclude osteomyelitis
•	 Urine stick test, microscopy and culture
•	 Swab of urethra, cervix and anorectum if gonococcal infection is possible
Table 91.4  Management of acute arthritis.
Cause of acute arthritis
Management
Septic arthritis
Antibiotic therapy
See Chapter 79
Joint drainage
Seek advice from orthopaedic surgeon/rheumatologist
Gout
High-dose NSAID (consider PPI cover)
See Chapter 92
Colchicine if NSAID contraindicated Oral corticosteroid (prednisolone 40 mg daily
for 1–2 days, then tapered over 7–10 days) if NSAID/colchicine contraindicated or
not tolerated
Consider intra-articular corticosteroid in place or oral corticosteroid if only one
joint affected
Pseudogout
Joint drainage
See Chapter 92
Intra-articular corticosteroid
NSAID (consider PPI cover)
Colchicine if NSAID contraindicated
Flare of rheumatoid arthritis
Seek advice from rheumatologist
Flare of osteoarthritis
NSAID (consider PPI cover), intra-articular corticosteroid
NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
