# CHAPTER 92 Crystal arthropathies

- Pages: 665-668
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:665 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
646
Gout and pseudogout are the two most common crystal arthropathies. Gout is caused by deposition of
monosodium urate monohydrate crystals, and pseudogout by calcium pyrophosphate crystals. Their
epidemiology is summarized in Table 92.1.
Crystal arthropathies
Kehinde Sunmboye
CHAPTER 92
Table 92.1  Epidemiology of gout and pseudogout.
Gout
Pseudogout (calcium pyrophosphate
dihydrate deposition (CPPD) disease)
Age
Predominantly 30–60 years, risk increases
with advancing age
>60 years, risk increases in the elderly
Sex
Male predominance, post-menopausal
women, very rare in premenopausal women
Male: female ratio 1 : 1
Risk factors
Conditions that promote hyperuricaemia,
due to overproduction or under-excretion of
urate Overproduction of urate
Genetic diseases:
•	 Hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency
(Lesch–Nyhan syndrome)
•	 Superactivity of phosphoribosyl
pyrophosphate synthetase (PRPS)
High cell turnover:
•	 Cell lysis from chemotherapy for malignancies
•	 Lympho- and myelo-proliferative diseases
Under-excretion of urate:
•	 Chronic alcohol abuse (beer and hard liquor)
•	 Renal insufficiency (also below)
•	 Dehydration
Conditions that promote altered
concentrations of calcium, inorganic
pyrophosphate (PPi) and the solubility
products of these ions
Genetic diseases:
•	 Mutations in the ANKH gene, leading to
altered PPi metabolism (familial CPPD
deposition disease)
Metabolic conditions causing CPPD
deposition:
•	 Hyperparathyroidism
•	 Haemochromatosis
•	 Hypomagnesaemia
•	 Hypophosphataemia
•	 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
(The five Hs of CPPD disease)
Related comorbid
conditions
Hypertension
Diabetes mellitus
Renal insufficiency
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Hypercholesterolaemia
Obesity
Anaemia
Hyperparathyroidism
Haemochromatosis
Hypomagnesaemia (Chapter 52)
Hypophosphataemia (Chapter 52)
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
Dietary Factors
Foods rich in purines such as red meat and
seafood
No clear dietary causes

<!-- page:666 -->
Crystal arthropathies
647
Priorities
•	 Septic arthritis (Chapter 79) must be excluded in any patient presenting with an acute monoarthritis.
•	 The clinical assessment of a patient with suspected gout or pseudogout is given in Table 92.2 and investigation is needed urgently in Table 92.3. Management is summarized in Figure 92.1.
Table 92.2  Focused assessment in suspected acute gout or pseudogout.
Element
Comment
Time course and duration
of joint and other
symptoms
In gout, attacks begin abruptly, usually overnight, and typically reach maximum
intensity within 12 h.
In pseudogout, attacks may resemble those of acute gout or follow a sub-acute
course over several days.
Pattern of joint
involvement
In gout, the first MTP joint (podagra) is the initial joint involved in 50% of cases and
is eventually involved in >90% of cases. Monoarticular involvement occurs
commonly, although polyarticular acute flares do occur.
In pseudogout, large joint involvement such as the knee, wrist, elbow or ankle.
Context and comorbidities
See Table 92.1.
History of trauma
Trauma may cause agitation, with subsequent deposition of urate and CPPD crystals
in patients with tophi and chondrocalcinosis, respectively.
Examination of involved
joint(s) other signs
Swelling, warmth, redness (sometimes resembling cellulitis) and tenderness. In gout,
tophi may be present in the helix of the ear, fingers, toes, prepatellar bursa and
olecranon bursa.
Fever
May be present in polyarticular presentations of gout or pseudogout (septic arthritis
must be excluded).
Table 92.3  Urgent investigation for suspected acute gout or pseudogout.
X-ray of involved joints
Aspiration of involved joint (samples for crystal analysis, microscopy and culture)
Blood culture (×2) if febrile
Creatinine and electrolytes
Urate level (may be normal in acute gout; gout and pseudogout may coexist)
Full blood count
If pseudogout confirmed:
Bone profile: calcium and phosphate, alkaline phosphatase
Magnesium
Ferritin, serum iron and total iron binding capacity (to assess for haemochromatosis)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (hypothyroidism and pseudogout often coexist)
Parathyroid hormone levels (if hypercalcaemia)

<!-- page:667 -->
648
Acute Medicine
Gout or pseudogout suspected?
 (Tables 92.1 and 92.2)
Aspirate joint (Chapter 111), perform synovial
ﬂuid culture, Gram stain, microscopy and crystal
analysis   (see Figure 91.1 for the assessment of the
patient with acute arthritis)
Urate crystals detected,
culture negative
CPPD crystals detected,
culture negative
Crystal analysis negative,
culture negative
1. NSAID (ibuprofen 400 mg 8-hourly PO or naproxen
500 mg 12-hourly PO for 5 days) (if renal function
satisfactory)
OR
2. Colchicine 500 μgm 8-hourly PO for 7 days;
500 μgm once daily if eGFR<30)
OR
3. Prednisolone 30–40 mg once daily PO for 7days
or intramuscular methyl prednisolone 120 mg stat
or intra-articular steroids
1. Diagnosis of gout still possible,
if hyperuricaemia present, or
consider pseudogout if
chondrocalcinosis on X-ray
2. Consider other aetiology
Assess if hyperuricaemia is 1° or 2°
Assess for urate overproduction
versus under excretion
Frequent attacks ≥ 3/yr.
Difﬁcult to treat gout
Clinical or X-ray evidence of tophi
Urate overproduction
Low dose prophylactic colchicine +
urate lowering therapy when acute
gout resolves
Rule out 2° causes of
chondrocalcinosis (serum Ca2+, PO4
–,
Mg2+, serum Fe, ferritin TIBC, TSH)
Frequent attacks of
pseudogout ≥ 3/yr.
Low dose daily prophylactic
colchicine
Figure 92.1  Treatment algorithm for acute gout and pseudogout.

<!-- page:668 -->
Crystal arthropathies
649
Further reading
Cowley S, McCarthy G. (2023) Diagnosis and treatment of calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD)
disease: a review. Open Access Rheumatol 15, 33–41. DOI: 10.2147/OARRR.S389664. PMID: 36987530;
PMCID: PMC10040153.
Dalbeth N, Merriman TR, Stamp LK. (2016). Gout Lancet 388, 2039–2052.
NICE guidelines (2022) Recommendations | Gout: diagnosis and management|Guidance|NICE. Available from
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng219/chapter/Recommendations. [Accessed: 8 May 2024].
Rosenthal AK, Ryan LM. (2016) Calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease. N Engl J Med 374, 2575–2584.
