# CHAPTER 93 Rheumatoid arthritis

- Pages: 669-674
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:669 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
650
Introduction
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an auto-immune inflammatory disease of the joints, typically presenting with pain,
stiffness and swelling of symmetrical small and large joints and can progress to joint destruction and extraarticular manifestations (EAMs, see Table 93.1), if insufficiently treated.
RA affects women three times more commonly than men, with the highest incidence in the fifth and sixth
decades.
Priorities
•	 Early and effective management can prevent deformity, development of EAMs and reduce mortality.
•	 Diagnostic investigations include elevated CRP, rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide
(anti-CCP) and imaging of the joints, usually by ultrasound.
•	 Treatment includes initiation of a conventional disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (cDMARD) with
optional bridging of glucocorticoids dependent on the level of inflammation.
•	 Biological therapies are used if low disease activity or remission is not achieved with optimisation of
cDMARDs.
•	 The multi-disciplinary team (MDT) plays a key role in the holistic management of patients with RA.
Rheumatoid arthritis
Charlotte David and Joel David
CHAPTER 93
Table 93.1  EAMs by system.
System
EAM
Skin
Nodules, Raynaud’s phenomenon, petechiae, purpura, ulcers and gangrene.
Pulmonary
Bronchiolitis obliterans, organizing pneumonia, interstitial lung disease (UIP more than NSIP) and
pleural disease.
Cardiac
Valvular disease, myocarditis, arrhythmias, vasculitis and pericarditis.
Neurological
Mono/polyneuritis multiplex.
Eyes
Sicca syndrome, episcleritis and scleritis.
Haematological
Felty’s syndrome (RA, neutropenia and splenomegaly) and anaemia of chronic disease.
Renal
Glomerulonephritis, interstitial nephritis and amyloid deposition.

<!-- page:670 -->
Rheumatoid arthritis
651
Pathology
The cause of RA, like other auto-immune conditions, is unknown. It is thought that genetic and environmental
factors play a role in causation and development. The pathology is characterized by activation of endothelial
cells resulting in neovascularization within the synovial membrane. The resultant hypertrophy causes bony erosion and cartilage destruction within the joint. Cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-1
(IL-1) and IL-6 are key in this inflammatory process).
The disease can be classified into seropositive and seronegative disease, based on the presence of the rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated C-peptide antibody. (ACPA). More than half of patients with RA are seropositive. RF is produced by B cells present in the inflamed synovium. RF activates complement and leukocyte
infiltration within the synovium. It may be present in patients with other auto-immune diseases and therefore
has a limited specificity in the diagnosis of RA.
Anti-CCP has a specificity of 98% and can be used as a prognostic indicator of erosive disease.
Natural history
The natural history of the disease is relapsing and remitting, and if left untreated, may lead to progressive joint
destruction, deformity, and premature mortality secondary to EAMs, and also accelerated atheromatosis which
correlates with untreated inflammation. Methotrexate has played a seminal role in reducing this premature
mortality, with a 70% reduction when compared to other disease-modifying drugs.
History and examination
The typical presentation of RA is with polyarticular symmetrical joint disease, mainly in the hands and feet.
Key features in the history
•	 One in four patients has an acute or subacute onset.
•	 Presents with small joint pain, often multiple at a time.
•	 Morning joint stiffness, lasting >30 min, improves with movement.
•	 Swelling of joints.
•	 Limitations to activities of daily living (ADLs).
•	 Joint-specific symptoms such as carpal tunnel syndrome in wrist disease.
•	 Systemic symptoms are present in up to a third of patients and include fevers, malaise, weight loss and
fatigue.
Key examination findings
•	 ‘Soft’ swelling of joints secondary to joint effusions. The joint may also be described as ‘boggy’ secondary to
synovial thickening.
•	 Tenderness on palpation or passive movement of the joint.
•	 Distribution is symmetrical involving small joints* or large joints**.
•	 Reduced grip strength (a useful biomarker).
•	 Palmar erythema.
•	 Thickening of the flexor tendons in the palm.
•	 Rheumatoid nodulosis, including along the palmar tendon sheaths which may result in trigger finger, and
subcutaneously near bony prominences.

<!-- page:671 -->
652
Acute Medicine
•	 Deformities (prevalent in advanced disease):
•	 Boutonniere (flexion of the PIP with hyperextension of the DIP) and Swan Neck (PIP hyperextension with
DIP flexion) deformities – resulting from damage and subluxation of PIPs and tendons.
•	 Z thumb (flexion of the MCP with hyperextension of the interphalangeal joint).
•	 Ulnar deviation or drift of the MCPs.
*Small joints: metacarpophalangeal (MCPs), metatarsophalangeal (MTPs), proximal interphalangeal (PIPs) and
wrist joints.
**Large joints: ankle, knee, elbow and shoulder joints.
Investigations
Investigation
For diagnosis
Following diagnosis
Blood tests
•	 RF +/− anti-CCP
•	 Full blood count (FBC): anaemia of chronic
disease, thrombocytosis, mild leucocytosis.
•	 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive
protein (CRP) are elevated in inflammation.
•	 ESR and CRP are elevated during an acute
phase of the disease and can therefore be
used as biomarkers of active disease.
•	 Anti-CCP can be used as a prognostic
indicator of disease severity.
Imaging
•	 X-ray* hands/feet if persistent synovitis.
•	 If X-ray changes are not yet present, Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) may be helpful in
identifying hypertrophic synovial tissue.
•	 Ultrasound scan (USS) may also be used to
identify joint inflammation.
•	 X-ray hands/feet to assess for bony erosions.
•	 MRI and USS can be used as biomarkers of
disease activity through measurement of the
volume of inflamed tissue.
Questionnaires
•	 Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) is used
to assess the patient’s functional status in relation
to disease.
•	 HAQ.
•	 Disease Activity Score (DAS28)**.
Synovial fluid analysis may help to identify when a rheumatoid joint is complicated by infection.
* Pathognomonic x-ray findings of the hands/feet are soft tissue swelling, periarticular osteopenia and osteoporosis,
narrowing of the joint spaces, cysts and bony erosions.
** DAS28 is a quantitative index to measure disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis and response to treatment. It’s
comprised of information on the number of swollen tender joints, the acute phase response and the patient’s
self-assessment of disease activity.
Differential diagnoses
Differential diagnosis
Connective Tissue Disorders (CTDs) –
for example systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE)
•	 Usually not associated with deformity or erosive disease.
•	 More likely to present with additional signs and symptoms such as rashes,
mouth ulcers and Raynaud’s phenomenon (although 10% of patients with
RA will have Raynaud’s).
Fibromyalgia
•	 ‘Trigger points’ at non-articular sites with absence of joint swelling/reduced
range of motion, and normal blood tests.
Viral arthritis
•	 Usually polyarthritis.
•	 < six-week course.
•	 Diagnosis aided by history and serological testing.
Septic arthritis
•	 Single hot, red, swollen joint.
•	 Often systemically unwell.
•	 Requires aspiration to isolate organism.

<!-- page:672 -->
Rheumatoid arthritis
653
Differential diagnosis
Osteoarthritis
•	 Joint distribution is different – in hands, the distal interphalangeal joints
(DIPs) are more affected than the PIPs.
•	 Associated with Heberden’s and Bouchard’s nodes.
•	 Swelling feels bony.
•	 Stiffness lasting <30 min, often toward the end of the day and worse on
movement.
•	 X-ray features: joint-space narrowing, loss of cartilage and osteophyte
formation.
Crystalline arthritis
•	 Look for gout risk factors and tophi.
•	 Serum urate level is elevated.
•	 Synovial fluid analysis shows presence of crystals.
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR)
•	 More associated with shoulder/pelvic girdle pain/stiffness.
•	 Joint involvement is milder, associated with synovitis of the shoulders, hips
and occasionally the wrists.
•	 It has a significant response to steroids.
Psoriatic arthritis
•	 Joint involvement is usually asymmetric.
•	 May have DIP involvement.
•	 90% of patients have associated psoriasis or a family history of psoriasis.
Reactive arthritis
•	 Recent viral/bacterial infection.
•	 Causes symmetrical inflammation of the joints in the hands/feet.
Sarcoidosis
•	 Usually associated with respiratory disease – chest X-ray advisable if sarcoid
is suspected.
•	 Elevated serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
Seronegative spondylarthritis
•	 If there is a history of inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis or back pain
and a family history this differential should be suspected.
Palindromic rheumatism
•	 Episodes of intense joint inflammation that affects one or several joints
sequentially, with asymptomatic periods in between.
•	 May progress to RA particularly in the presence of anti-CCP.
Management
The management of RA is guided by a treat-to-target strategy. The strategy aim is remission. The response to
treatment is assessed using the biomarkers – namely acute phase markers and scoring systems, such as DAS28.
Conventional disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs
First line treatment of RA is cDMARD monotherapy. Treatment is started within the first three months of persistent symptoms. cDMARDs include oral or subcutaneous methotrexate (first line, with supplemental folic
acid), leflunomide, sulfasalazine or hydroxychloroquine (as an alternative or in addition to the aforementioned
drugs, in mild disease). The doses are up-titrated as tolerated and can be given in combination if the target has
not been achieved.
A short-term course of steroids (either orally or three IM depomedrone at monthly intervals) may be used to
bridge treatment with the cDMARD to reduce the symptoms of inflammation. If the disease is less active, the
steroid bridging may be omitted.
Steroids can, although not ideally, be used long-term, and only when all other treatment options have been
offered and the patient is properly counselled on the complications and side effects of treatment. They may
also be offered when there are EAMs present.

<!-- page:673 -->
654
Acute Medicine
Biological therapies
There are different classes of biological DMARDs (bDMARDs) available to use for RA if remission is not achieved.
These include TNF-alpha inhibitors, CD80/CD86 inhibitor, IL-6 inhibitors, CD-20 reducing agents and anti-IL1
antibody (although this is no longer licensed in the United Kingdom). Anti-TNF is often used as first line.
Biological therapies may be used concurrently with cDMARDs or as a monotherapy if cDMARDs are not tolerated. It is advisable to change class of biological therapy if treatment is not tolerated or ineffective.
Biological therapies are expensive and may sometimes be associated with a slightly higher risk of infection
when steroids are used concomitantly, therefore guidelines exist for their commencement. Infections such as
latent tuberculosis and reactivation of hepatitis B are of main concern, and therefore patients are required to have
blood tests (Hepatitis B and C, interferon-gamma release assay and HIV serology) and a chest X-ray prior to commencing therapy. Administration of live vaccines is also contraindicated in patients taking biological therapies.
Target
Examples
Pharmacology
Notes
TNF-alpha
Infliximab, adalimumab,
etanercept, golimumab,
certolizumab
Blockade of the pro-inflammatory
cascade involved in formation of
the pannus.
1st line
CD80/CD86
Abatacept
Inhibits T-cell activation through
binding to CD80/86 on the
antigen-presenting cells.
Useful in TNF-inhibitor refractory
disease.
IL-6
Tocilizumab, sarilumab
IL-6 is a key cytokine involved in
the pathogenesis of RA.
Greater efficacy than TNF-inhibitors
when used as monotherapy. Also
useful as a monotherapy if cDMARDs
are poorly tolerated.
CD20
Rituximab
CD20 is found in B lymphocytes,
which produce auto-antibodies.
Binding to CD20 causes B cell
depletion.
Useful in sero-positive patients who
do not tolerate anti-TNF therapy.
Surgical interventions
Referral to surgical specialties should be considered if there has been significant joint damage and inadequate
response to conservative management of pain, joint function, deformity or persistent synovitis.
Complications of RA such as carpal tunnel syndrome, cervical myelopathy or tendon rupture also require
referral.
Remission
After six months of complete remission, therapies may be tapered. The bDMARD is the first to taper, with
continuation of the cDMARD. If remission is maintained, the cDMARD may be tapered after six months.
The management of therapies therefore requires regular review – initially at six months following remission
and from then on, annually.
Multi-disciplinary team
RA has a significant impact on patient lives through pain, disease activity and EAMS, fatigue, functional impact,
libido, appetite and mood. There is an important role for the MDT.

<!-- page:674 -->
Rheumatoid arthritis
655
Physiotherapy is used to improve muscle strength, general fitness and management of functional
impairments. Occupational therapists can assist with management of associated functional limitations.
Podiatrists may be of assistance if there is presence of foot problems and can advise on footwear. Psychological
interventions should also be offered to patients with RA. Collaboration with other medical specialties such
as ophthalmology, respiratory and gastroenterology is often necessary. Rapid access to services should be
available to patients, such as nurse specialist hotlines. Self-help through recognized charities, such as Versus
Arthritis and Arthritis Research, are also very important.
Further reading
Aletaha D, Smolen JS. (2018) Diagnosis and management of rheumatoid arthritis: a review. Jama 320(13),
1360–1372.
Findeisen KE, Sewell J, Ostor AJ. (2021) Biological therapies for rheumatoid arthritis: an overview for the
clinician. Biologics 15, 343–352.
NICE CKS. Rheumatoid arthritis: what else might it be?Available at: https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/
rheumatoid-arthritis/diagnosis/differential-diagnosis/. [Accessed: 20/12/2023].
Prete M, Racanelli V, Digiglio L, et al. (2011) Extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis: an update.
Autoimmun. Rev. 11(2), 123–131.
