# CHAPTER 94 Acute vasculitis

- Pages: 675-681
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:675 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
656
“The only certainty is that nothing is certain.”
– Pliny the Elder
Introduction
Vasculitis, characterized by inflammation of blood vessels and leading to organ damage, presents a significant
challenge in acute medicine due to its diverse clinical manifestations and potential for serious complications.
Early recognition and prompt management are crucial to prevent end-organ damage and improve outcomes.
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of acute vasculitis, covering its basic concepts, classification,
symptoms, examination findings, diagnosis and management strategies.
Pathophysiology
The specific pathophysiology varies depending on the type and severity of vasculitis, influencing the clinical
manifestations and outcomes of the disease.
The pathogenesis involves immune-mediated processes where immune cells activate and release proinflammatory cytokines, leading to the formation of immune complexes that deposit in blood vessel walls,
initiating inflammation. This results in endothelial cell dysfunction, infiltration of inflammatory cells like neutrophils and lymphocytes, and subsequent tissue damage. Additionally, the release of harmful enzymes and reactive oxygen species exacerbates vascular injury. Genetic predisposition and environmental factors such as
infections or medications can contribute to its development.
Classification of vasculitis
The classification of vasculitis is essential for understanding its diverse clinical presentations and guiding management. Vasculitis can be classified based on the size of the affected vessels: small, medium and large vessels
(Table 94.1 and Figure 94.1). They are also classified based on aetiology into primary (occurring in isolation)
and secondary vasculitis (associated with other conditions, e.g. systemic lupus erythematous, rheumatoid
arthritis or infections etc.). Some vasculitides do not fit these classifications and could be systemic like Behcet’s
syndrome or limited to one organ (primary CNS vasculitis).
Acute vasculitis
Gagandeep Sukhija and Arti Mahto
CHAPTER 94

<!-- page:676 -->
Acute vasculitis
657
Symptoms and organ involvement
Systemic vasculitis can present with a wide range of clinical manifestations (Table 94.2). The pattern of
involvement can vary between each type of vasculitis but there is considerable overlap in these conditions
(Table 94.3).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of acute vasculitis relies on a combination of clinical evaluation, laboratory investigations, imaging
studies and histopathological examination.
Table 94.1  Classification of vasculitis.
Classification
Description
Small vessel
vasculitis
Diseases affecting small vessels; includes ANCA-associated granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA),
microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) or
anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody vasculitis
Medium vessel
vasculitis
Diseases affecting medium-sized vessels; includes polyarteritis nodosa and Kawasaki disease
Large vessel
vasculitis
Diseases affecting large vessels, predominantly the aorta and its branches; prominent examples are
giant cell arteritis (GCAs) and Takayasu arteritis
Immune complex small vessel vasculitis
Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein)
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
(Anti-C1q vasculitis)
Medium vessel vasculitis

Polyarteritis nodosa

Kawasaki disease
Anti-GBM disease
ANCA-associated small vessel vasculitis

Microscopic polyangiitis

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis

(Wegener's)

Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis

(Churg-Strauss)
Large vessel vasculitis
  Takayasu arteritis
  Giant cell arteritis
Figure 94.1  Classification of vasculitis.

<!-- page:677 -->
658
Acute Medicine
Table 94.2  Typical presentations of acute vasculitis.
Symptom
Description
General symptoms
Fatigue, malaise, unintentional loss of body weight
Headache
Often severe, persistent and localized, especially in temporal arteritis (GCAs)
Fever
May be present, particularly in systemic vasculitis
Skin manifestations
Varied, including purpura, ulcers, nodules, and livedo reticularis
Joint involvement
Arthritis (joint inflammation), arthralgia (joint pain), commonly affecting small or large joints
Neurological
symptoms
Neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex, polyneuropathy), cranial nerve palsies (facial nerve palsy,
abducens nerve palsy), stroke, transient ischaemic attacks, cognitive impairment,
encephalopathy and seizures
Pulmonary
involvement
Cough, dyspnoea, haemoptysis, pleuritic chest pain, lung nodules, interstitial lung disease and
cavitating lung lesions
Cardiac
manifestations
Chest pain, dyspnoea, arrhythmias, myocarditis, pericarditis and heart failure
Gastrointestinal
symptoms
Abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, diarrhoea and mesenteric ischemia
Renal involvement
Haematuria, proteinuria, renal insufficiency and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
Ophthalmological
symptoms
Visual disturbances (e.g., blurring, diplopia), amaurosis fugax, anterior ischemic optic
neuropathy, uveitis and scleritis
ENT symptoms
Epistaxis, sinusitis, hearing loss, otalgia and nasal septal perforation
Testicular pain
Pain or tenderness in the testes, may indicate vasculitis involving the testicular arteries
Table 94.3  Symptoms and system involvement in various vasculitis.
System
Examination findings
Small vessel
vasculitis (e.g. GPA
and MPA)
Medium vessel vasculitis
(e.g., polyarteritis nodosa
and Kawasaki disease)
Large vessel
vasculitis
(e.g. GCA)
Skin
Purpura, ulcers, livedo
reticularis
++
++
+
Joints
Arthritis, arthralgia
++
+++
+
Neurological
Mononeuritis multiplex,
peripheral neuropathy
++
++
+
Cardiac
Chest pain, dyspnoea,
arrhythmias
+
++
++
Pulmonary
Cough, dyspnoea,
haemoptysis
++
+
+
Renal
Haematuria, proteinuria,
renal insufficiency
++
++
+
Ophthalmological
Visual disturbances,
anterior ischemic optic
neuropathy
++
+
+++
ENT
Epistaxis, sinusitis,
hearing loss
++
+
+
Gastrointestinal
Abdominal pain,
gastrointestinal bleeding
++
++
+
Head
Headache, jaw
claudication
+
+
+++
General
Fatigue, malaise, weight
loss
++
++
++
Note: The prominence of symptoms may vary within each type of vasculitis and depends on factors such as disease
severity and individual patient characteristics.

<!-- page:678 -->
Acute vasculitis
659
Consider vasculitis in a patient presenting with constitutional upset, systemic symptoms or headache (after
the age of 50), with or without evidence of organ dysfunction after ruling out common causes (Table 94.4).
Diagnosis of specific vasculitis is based on pattern of organ involvement, laboratory features, imaging and
histopathological findings on biopsy.
Clinical history and physical examination are crucial for identifying specific symptoms and signs suggestive
of vasculitis (Table 94.5) and ruling out differentials (Table 94.4).
Table 94.4  Differential diagnosis of systemic vasculitis.
Cause/
subtype
Clinical features
Laboratory features
Imaging
Histopathological
findings
Infectious
vasculitis
Sepsis with multiorgan failure
Elevated inflammatory
markers (ESR and CRP)
CT/MRI showing
vascular
abnormalities
Micro abscesses,
thrombi, fibrinoid
necrosis
Infective endocarditis
Positive blood cultures
PET scan for
active
inflammation
Tuberculosis
Raised ESR
CT showing
cavitating lesions
Caseating
granuloma
Falciparum malaria
Mycoplasma and legionella infection
Syphilis, Lyme disease, leptospirosis
Fungal infection (coccidioidomycosis
and histoplasmosis)
Neoplastic
diseases
Metastatic cancer
Specific tumour
markers (e.g. PSA and
CA-125)
Imaging (CT, MRI
and PET)
Variable (may show
tumour emboli,
infiltration)
Cancer with paraneoplastic syndrome
Acute leukaemia
Lymphoma
Vascular
diseases
Multifocal embolism from the heart
(e.g. infective endocarditis, atrial
myxoma and intracardiac thrombus)
Echocardiography
(for cardiac emboli)
Emboli, dissection,
thrombosis
Aortic dissection involving multiple
branch arteries
CT angiography (for
aortic dissection)
Other
disorders
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC)
Coagulation studies
(e.g. D-dimer and
fibrinogen)
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP)
ADAMTS13 activity
(for TTP)
Drug toxicity (prescribed and
recreational)
Drug levels (if
suspected)
Pre-eclampsia
Systemic lupus erythematosus
ANA, DsDNA,
Complement C3
and C4
Antiphospholipid syndrome (recurrent
venous or arterial thromboses, foetal
loss, mild thrombocytopenia,
anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus
anticoagulant antibodies)
Lupus anti-coagulant
and anti-cardiolipin

<!-- page:679 -->
660
Acute Medicine
Laboratory investigations typically include assessment of inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), renal function, full blood count (FBC), blood cultures (to rule out
infection), urine dip, culture and urine protein creatinine ratio, Electrocardiogram (ECG), chest X-ray as well as
autoantibody testing (e.g. ANCA, PR3, MPO and anti-GBM), myeloma screen and other autoantibody testing
in case of overlapping symptoms and signs.
Imaging such as angiography, ultrasound, Computed Tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
positron emission tomography (PET-CT) scan aid in visualizing vessel inflammation and identifying affected areas.
Nerve conduction studies, echocardiography and pulmonary function tests may be required based on
presenting symptoms.
Management of acute vasculitis
The focus of management is to recognise suspected new onset vasculitis and contacting a specialist for advice
while at the same time ruling out other differential diagnoses (Table 94.4).
Early intervention with high-dose steroids should be considered in patients with GCA. Early specialist input
is required for all patients, especially those with organ or life-threatening presentations. Patients require close
observation and repeated examinations as clinical symptoms can evolve rapidly. Patients with non-organ
threatening presentation can be managed on an ambulatory basis.
Management of acute vasculitis aims to control inflammation early, prevent long-term end-organ damage
and improve patient outcomes.
Table 94.5  Focused assessment of the patient with possible systemic vasculitis.
History
•	 Gather comprehensive medical history, focusing on previous episodes and therapies administered. Evaluate for
potential flare-ups, intercurrent infections or comorbidities.
•	 Inquire about illicit drug use.
•	 Consider past symptoms to identify patterns indicative of systemic involvement (e.g. weight loss, fever, rash, with a
history of chronic nasal discharge, hearing loss or neuropathy).
•	 Recognize characteristic features such as upper and lower airway involvement in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)
and predominant lung and renal involvement in microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), with rare upper airway symptoms.
Examination
•	 Conduct a thorough physical examination, including weight assessment for diagnosis aid and treatment dosing.
•	 Evaluate eyes for signs of inflammation or haemorrhage, consider slit lamp examination for suspected uveitis.
•	 Assess for sensorineural hearing loss.
•	 Inspect oral and genital mucosa for ulceration.
•	 Examine skin for lesions indicative of vasculitis, including infarcts, purpura or gangrene.
•	 Palpate lymph nodes for enlargement.
•	 Assess pulses in all limbs and compare blood pressure in both arms (and legs if indicated for large vessel vasculitis
suspicion).
•	 Check for artery tenderness and listen for bruits.
•	 Auscultate chest and heart for signs of inflammation, effusion or murmurs.
•	 Palpate abdomen for organomegaly and evaluate the aorta.
•	 Assess for neuropathy or central nervous system involvement through cranial nerve examination, reflexes, power,
sensation and orientation.

<!-- page:680 -->
Acute vasculitis
661
Look for evidence of organ or life-threatening disease that may warrant contacting the ITU/HDU team early
on for supportive care.
Corticosteroids are the cornerstone of therapy, with high-dose initial therapy followed by a tapering regimen
based on clinical response.
Other immunosuppressive agents such as cyclophosphamide, rituximab, methotrexate or azathioprine are
often used as steroid-sparing agents usually by the specialist particularly in severe cases or those with relapsing
disease. Avacopan (complement 5a receptor antagonist) is a new steroid-sparing agent being used to treat
ANCA vasculitis (GPA and MPA).
Biologic agents including tocilizumab (GCA) and may be considered in refractory cases.
Supportive care and adjunctive therapies are essential to address specific complications and optimize patient
well-being.
Giant cell arteritis (GCAs): diagnosis and management
The commonest vasculitis in adults is giant-cell arteritis (GCAs), usually presenting with new-onset headache
in older people (patients over 50 years of age).
Associated symptoms include constitutional upset, malaise, weight loss, jaw claudication and scalp
tenderness.
It carries a significant risk (20–30%) of visual loss from ischaemic optic neuropathy and so needs urgent
assessment and treatment.
Diagnosis is based on pretest probability, TA US and biopsy demonstrating characteristic inflammatory infiltrates (Figure 94.2).
Management involves high-dose corticosteroids to prevent vision loss and long-term therapy with careful
monitoring for steroid-related complications. Adjunctive therapies such as methotrexate and tocilizumab may
be considered in refractory cases.
Prognosis and complications
The prognosis of acute vasculitis varies depending on the specific subtype, extent of organ involvement and
response to therapy. Common complications include organ damage (e.g. renal failure and pulmonary haemorrhage), infection (related to immunosuppressive therapy) and long-term sequelae of corticosteroid use (e.g.
osteoporosis and diabetes). Long-term follow-up is essential to monitor disease activity, assess treatment
response, and manage complications effectively.
Conclusion
Acute vasculitis poses significant challenges in acute medicine, requiring a multidisciplinary approach for optimal management.
Early recognition, prompt diagnosis and tailored treatment strategies are essential to improve outcomes and
prevent complications.

<!-- page:681 -->
662
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. (2013) revised international Chapel Hill consensus conference
nomenclature of vasculitides. Arthritis & Rheumatology 65(1), 1–11. DOI: 10.1002/art.37715.
Merkel P. Overview of and approach to the vasculitides in adults. In: UpToDate, Connor RF (Ed), Wolters
Kluwer. (Accessed on January 4, 2024). Available from Overview of and approach to the vasculitides in
adults - UpToDate
Vasculitis UK website: www.vasculitis.org.uk.
Zarka F, Veillette C, Makhzoum JP. (2020) A review of primary vasculitis mimickers based on the Chapel Hill
consensus classification. Int J Rheumatol 2020, 8392542.
- Check full blood count, C reactive protein, ESR, renal and liver function and blood glucose.
- Consider checking Myeloma screen, ANCA ab in patients with other symptoms.
- Seek Urgent advice from Rheumatologist or refer to your local GCA pathway.
Consider GCA if >50 years with the following features:
- Acute new headache/facial pain
- Scalp tenderness
- Jaw/tongue claudication
- Visual symptoms (amaurosis fugax, diplopia, visual loss)
- PMR symptoms
- Fevers, weight loss
- Temporal artery abnormality: non
- Raised ESR/CRP
Immediate referral
GCA Likely
Temporal artery US (requested by Rheum only)
Suspected/conﬁrmed GCA management:
Commence Steroid treatment and PPI cover
- Prednisolone 60 mg OD – if jaw claudication, but no visual symptoms
- Prednisolone 40 mg OD – if no jaw claudication or visual symptoms
- Pulsed IV methylprednisolone 500 mg-1g OD for 3 days – acute/intermittent visual loss.
*estimate probability based on Sounthend GCA Probability score
- Start Steroids (as below) while waiting for specialist input if likely or visual symptoms.
Estimate probability of GCA *
Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA)
Figure 94.2  Diagnosis and management of GCA.
