# CHAPTER 99 Erythroderma and toxic epidermal necrolysis

- Pages: 722-728
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:722 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
703
Erythroderma
Erythroderma describes redness and exfoliation of the skin, affecting more than 90% of the body surface area.
It is a dermatological emergency as patients are at risk of associated haemodynamic and metabolic
complications.
Aetiology
•	 The aetiology of erythroderma is broad and included in Table  99.1. The most common causes include
underlying inflammatory skin disease (e.g. eczema or psoriasis), drug reactions, haematological malignancies
(e.g. subcutaneous T cell lymphoma or Hodgkin’s lymphoma) and idiopathic.
Erythroderma and toxic epidermal
necrolysis
Nemesha Desai and Sally Aziz
CHAPTER 99
Table 99.1  Causes of erythroderma.
Inflammatory skin disease
Atopic eczema
Psoriasis
Pityriasis rubra pilaris
Drug reactions
See Table 99.6 for common culprit
drugs
Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis
Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS)
Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Neoplastic
Primary skin malignancies, e.g. cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, cutaneous B-cell
lymphoma
Haematological or solid organ malignancy, e.g. Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Infective
Scabies
HIV
Staphylococcal scaled skin syndrome
Others
Idiopathic
Autoimmune blistering conditions
Connective tissue disease
Graft versus host disease

<!-- page:723 -->
704
Acute Medicine
Clinical assessment
•	 The patient with erythroderma requires urgent assessment. History taking should enquire about the timing
and symptoms of the rash, underlying diseases and a drug timeline. Examination involves general assessment of the patient with specific inspection of the skin, nails, scalp and mucosal surfaces. A general approach
to history and examination is described in Table 99.2.
•	 Investigations required will vary from patient to patient, depending on the possible differential diagnoses
and are listed in Table 99.3.
•	 Key clinical features during your assessment may guide you towards the underlying cause of erythroderma.
These are shown in Table 99.4.
Table 99.2  Focused assessment of the patient with erythroderma.
History
Take a full medical and drug history, focusing on a personal and family history of underlying skin disease, atopy and
new medications in the preceding eight weeks, to include topical agents, complementary and over-the-counter
therapies.
Establish the timing of onset of the rash; drug reactions tend to evolve rapidly, whereas inflammatory skin disease may
be more insidious.
Assess for cutaneous symptoms; skin pain may be experienced with drug rashes and unstable psoriasis, itch with
atopic dermatitis.
Systemic symptoms should be sought including fever and prodromal flu-like illness.
Examination
Physiological observations and general examination.
Examine the palms and nails.
Inspect scalp, oral mucosa, natal cleft and genitalia in addition to the body skin. Observe carefully for pustules or
vesicles.
Multiple sterile micropustules are seen in erythrodermic psoriasis and drug reactions.
Examine for Nikolsky sign (see TEN skin failure).
Palpate for lymph nodes; widespread lymphadenopathy can occur in erythroderma as a non-specific reaction to the
inflammatory process (‘dermatopathic’ lymphadenopathy) and/ or secondary to the underlying aetiology (e.g.
cutaneous T- cell lymphoma).
In chronic erythroderma, ectropion, hair loss and thickening of the skin on the palms and soles are seen.
Table 99.3  Urgent investigation in erythroderma.
Full blood count and coagulation
Sodium, potassium, urea and creatinine: to monitor for derangement secondary to fluid loss
Liver function tests: drug reactions are often associated with hepatic derangement
C reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Bone profile
Immunoglobulins
Blood culture if febrile, mycoplasma serology
Skin swab to screen for secondary infections: bacterial and viral
ECG
Chest X-ray to assess for high-output cardiac failure
Skin biopsy should be performed if there is a negative history of established skin disease

<!-- page:724 -->
Erythroderma and toxic epidermal necrolysis
705
Management
•	 Erythroderma can extend rapidly and hence requires urgent intervention, as patients who appear well may
decompensate abruptly due to the extent of skin barrier impairment. All cases should be discussed with the
on-call dermatologist.
Patients are at risk of
•	 Dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities due to increased transepidermal water loss through inflamed skin
•	 High-output cardiac failure due to increased blood flow through the skin
•	 Hypothermia due to excessive heat loss through increased skin perfusion
•	 Hypoalbuminemia due to exfoliation of the skin and associated protein loss
•	 Infection due to compromise of mechanical skin barrier function
Priorities
Management is summarized in Figure 99.1.
General supportive measures
•	 Patients should be cared for in a monitored bed with close nursing input
•	 Discontinue any possible culprit drug causes and unnecessary medications
•	 Monitor and correct fluid balance and electrolytes
•	 Monitor body temperature. A Bair–Hugger blanket or equivalent can be applied to prevent heat loss and
maintain core temperature
•	 Initiate nutritional support early
•	 Treat secondary sepsis
•	 Copious bland emollient should be applied to whole body, 50 : 50 white soft paraffin/liquid paraffin is
recommended
•	 Topical steroids may be indicated and the choice of potency depends on the underlying diagnosis. A potent
topical steroid may be used in suspected drug reactions or eczema. A mild/moderate potency topical steroid
may be used in psoriasis. Potent topical steroids are avoided in psoriasis due to the risk of developing generalised pustular psoriasis.
Table 99.4  Common causes of erythroderma.
Cause
Key points on history
Clinical features seen in
particular disease
Important specific
tests
Psoriasis
Personal or family history of
psoriasis, withdrawal of recent
oral steroids
Scalp scale, nail changes
(pitting, onycholysis),
pustules. Joint involvement
Eczema
Personal or family history of
atopy
Lichenification of skin
Periorbital disease
Serum immunoglobulin
E (IgE), eosinophilia
Drug-related
New medications in the past
eight weeks
Morbilliform rash Flexural
erythema Pustules
Monitor eosinophils and
liver function for DRESS*
Cutaneous T cell
lymphoma (CTCL)
Generalized erythema
Circulating atypical T
cells
Pityriasis rubra
pilaris (PRP)
‘Islands’ of clear skin
* DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms: a severe idiosyncratic drug reaction with a
broad range of clinical features (which may include raised ALT) appearing two to eight weeks after starting
the causative drug.

<!-- page:725 -->
706
Acute Medicine
Disease-specific measures
•	 Systemic therapies can be used to treat patients where the underlying cause of erythroderma is known.
These treatments are usually patient dependant, initiated by specialists and drug-specific screening and
monitoring investigations are required.
•	 Treatments for erythrodermic atopic eczema include oral corticosteroids, antibiotics and systemic immunosuppression with ciclosporin, methotrexate or biologic therapies.
•	 Treatments for severe psoriasis include ciclosporin, methotrexate, acitretin or biologic therapies.
•	 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) requires specialist review for specific treatment.
•	 Pityriasis Rubra Pilaris (PRP) requires intensive topical steroids; second-line therapies include acitretin.
•	 For a large proportion of erythrodermic patients, an aetiology is not found; for such patients, continual
emollients and topical steroids should be considered, alongside supportive therapy to prevent and monitor
for complications.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
•	 Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is the most severe form of skin failure. It is rare, affecting 1–2 persons per
million population per year and associated with significant morbidity and mortality. It is a severe mucocutaneous reaction, usually drug-induced, characterized by fever, full-thickness skin necrosis affecting more
than 30% of the body surface area, erosion or ulceration of at least two mucous membrane sites (ocular,
oral or anogenital) and variable systemic organ involvement.
Copious
bland
emollient
Investigate and
treat for any
secondary
infection
Consider skin
biopsy
Admit to a monitored
bed
Fluid
replacement
Screening
investigations
for systemic
therapy.
Options include
ciclosporin,
methotrexate,
acitretin or
biologic
therapies
>90% body surface
erythematous
Known underlying
skin disease
No
Topical mid
potency
steroids
Psoriasis
Possible drug cause
Yes
Atopic
dermatitis
PRP
CTCL
Topical
potent
steroids or
oral steroids
Screening
investigations
for systemic
therapy.
Options include
ciclosporin,
methotrexate,
azathioprine or
biologic therapies
Stop culprit
drug and all
non vital
medications
Topical mid
potency
steroids
Specialist
review for
further
management
Specialist
review to
conﬁrm
diagnosis &
further
management
Specialist
review to
conﬁrm
diagnosis &
further
management
Warmed
room and
nutritional support
Figure 99.1  Management of erythroderma. CTCL, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma; DRESS, drug reaction with
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; PRP, pityriasis rubra pilaris.

<!-- page:726 -->
Erythroderma and toxic epidermal necrolysis
707
•	 TEN lies on a spectrum with Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS) and erythema multiforme major (see
Table 99.5). The aetiology is often drug-related (Table 99.6), rarely infections such as Mycoplasma and herpes simplex virus are implicated.
•	 At-risk individuals include the elderly (relating to polypharmacy), patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), HIV/AIDS and recipients of bone marrow transplants.
•	 The leading cause of death is secondary sepsis. Morbidity relating to chronic pain, Stricturing of mucosal
sites (e.g. urethral stenosis and vaginal synechiae causing chronic dyspareunia; ocular symblepharon, corneal
scarring and sicca symptoms), oesophageal strictures and bronchiolitis obliterans can persist long after the
acute cutaneous reaction has resolved.
Priorities
•	 Clinical assessment is given in Table 99.7 and investigation is needed urgently in Table 99.8. The SCORTEN
criteria predict mortality (Table 99.9).
•	 The main stay of management is supportive, focusing on high-level nursing care. The aims are prevention of
further skin injury, prevention of infection and maintenance of haemostasis and thermoregulation.
•	 Stop the suspected drug immediately. All drugs started within 7–21 days of the first manifestation of the
skin eruption should be discontinued. Consider any drug started within the previous eight weeks as a
candidate.
•	 Early referral to a multidisciplinary, high dependency/intensive care unit for 1 : 1 specialist nursing with
aseptic technique and close monitoring of vital parameters and respiratory function.
•	 Nurse in a side room, warmed to 30–32 °C to reduce percutaneous heat loss, on a pressure relieving
mattress with non-adherent bed lining such as Exu-dry* or Lyofoam* lined with copious bland emollient
such as 50 : 50 white soft paraffin.
•	 Cleanse the skin gently using warmed sterile water, saline or an antiseptic wash, e.g. chlorhexidine (1/5000).
•	 Cover skin with copious bland emollient such as 50 : 50 white soft paraffin and liquid paraffin.
Table 99.5  Features of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS) and erythema
multiforme major.
TEN
SJS
Erythema multiforme major
Percentage of
body skin affected
>30%
10%
n/a
Initial skin lesions
Painful dusky erythematous
cutaneous and mucosal skin
Erythema in mucous
membranes
Dusky erythema
Skin signs
Mucosal involvement Full thickness
epidermal necrosis resulting in
friable bullae Nikolsky positive
Mucosal involvement
Erosions and bullae
Targetoid skin lesions Mucosal
involvement
Mortality
>30%
<10%
Rare
Table 99.6  Medications which are likely causative agents in toxic epidermal necrolysis/Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Allopurinol
Aromatic anticonvulsants, e.g. carbamazepine, phenytoin, sodium valproate, phenobarbitone, lamotrigine
Antibiotics, e.g. amoxicillin, cotrimoxazole, penicillin, trimethoprim
HAART drugs, e.g. nevirapine
Analgesics, e.g. paracetamol, NSAIDs
Others: sulphasalazine, omeprazole, diuretics

<!-- page:727 -->
708
Acute Medicine
•	 Blisters should be decompressed, by piercing with a sterile needle. The epidermal roof of the blister may be
left in situ to act as a biological dressing.
•	 Denuded dermis should be covered with a primary non-adherent dressing, e.g. Mepitel, followed by a
secondary foam to help collect exudate, e.g. Mepilex.
•	 Careful fluid balance. IV fluid and electrolyte replacement may be needed. Where possible, site peripheral
venous cannulas through intact skin and change every 48 h to reduce the risk of infection.
Table 99.8  Urgent investigation in toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Full blood count and coagulation
C-reactive protein
Urea, creatinine and electrolytes
Liver function, bone profile, glucose, magnesium, lactate
Immunoglobulins
Mycoplasma serology
Blood culture
Skin and mucosal swabs to screen for secondary infections: viral and bacterial
Skin biopsy
ECG
Chest X-ray to assess for high-output cardiac failure
Table 99.7  Focused assessment in toxic-epidermal necrolysis.
History
A careful history of comorbidities and detailed drug history of the last eight weeks is imperative, including prescribed,
over-the-counter and complementary therapies. Specific symptoms to support a diagnosis of incipient TEN include skin
pain, involvement of the mucous membranes presenting as ocular pain, grittiness, photophobia, sore throat,
odynophagia, dysuria and systemic malaise, specifically flu-like symptoms and fever. Muco-cutaneous symptoms in
established disease include a spectrum of extensive blistering, erosions and haemorrhagic mucositis.
Examination
Careful skin and mucous membrane examination is required to assess the extent of involved sites. The skin may be
friable and denude easily on examination; hence assistance will be required to minimize direct handling of the skin
during examination. Assessment of the percentage body surface area involved should be made, to include erythema
(which may take the appearance of subtle slate grey pigmentation in darker skin types or where full thickness skin
necrosis is already established), erosions and bullae. Nikolsky sign is positive in TEN: gentle lateral pressure applied to the
skin results in separation of the epidermis from the dermis. The ocular, oral, genital and urethral mucous membranes
should be examined for involvement. Systemic examination should focus on respiratory and gastrointestinal systems,
which may exhibit early involvement, although any organ can be involved.
Table 99.9  SCORTEN scoring system for toxic epidermal
necrolysis.
SCORTEN criteria
Points
Age >40 years
1
Heart rate >120/min
1
Comorbid malignancy
1
Epidermal detachment >10% body surface
area on day 1
1
Serum urea >10 mol/L
1
Bicarbonate level <20 mmol/L
1
Serum glucose >14 mmol/L
1
Total SCORTEN score
Predicted mortality
0–1
1–3%
2
12%
3
35%
4
58%
5+
>90%

<!-- page:728 -->
Erythroderma and toxic epidermal necrolysis
709
•	 Daily assessment of eye, oral and genital involvement is necessary.
•	 Referral to ophthalmology for daily ocular hygiene, lubricating eye drops and preservative-free topical
antibiotics/steroids. Severe causes may require amniotic membrane transplantation to help prevent ocular
sequalae.
•	 Urinary catheters are effective in keeping the urethra patent, but meticulous aseptic technique must be
observed on insertion.
•	 Regular oral toilette with sterile water and soft applicator sponge to remove crusts and exudates.
•	 Supplement nutrition orally or with careful siting of a nasogastric tube.
•	 Ensure adequate analgesia, especially during dressing change.
Further management
•	 There are few large clinical trials on the therapeutic management of TEN/SJS, thus treatment remains supportive. Treatments that have been employed on a case-by-case basis include intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG), systemic corticosteroid and ciclosporin. However, in the absence of high-quality evidence supporting
any single agent, therapy remains supportive, with vigilant prevention of secondary infection.
•	 The patient and all doctors involved in the patient’s case, including the GP, should be provided with written
information regarding the episode and details regarding the culprit drug which they must avoid. Patients
should be encouraged to wear MedicAlert bracelet or amulet with this information.
Further reading
Creamer D, Walsh SA, Dziewulski P, et al. (2016) UK guidelines for the management of Stevens-Johnson
syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis in adults 2016. Br J Dermatol 174, 1194–1227. http://www.bad.
org.uk/shared/get-file.ashx?id=3968&itemtype=document.
Scwartz R. (2013) Toxic epidermal necrolysis Part II. Prognosis, sequelae, diagnosis, differential diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol 69(2), 182.
Tso S, Satchwell F, Moiz H, et al. (2021) Erythroderma (exfoliative dermatitis). Part 1: underlying causes,
clinical presentation and pathogenesis. Clin Exp Dermatol 46(6), 1001–1010.
