# CHAPTER 101 Same-day emergency care

- Pages: 738-743
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:738 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
719
Acute (Internal) Medicine
The specialty of acute medicine was developed to streamline the assessment and care of patients with acute
illness or exacerbations of long-term conditions. Patients accepted on an acute medical unit are assessed on
arrival by a senior doctor and assigned to one of four streams of care:
•	 Same-day emergency care, for same-day treatment and discharge without using a hospital bed
•	 Short-stay (<72 h) inpatient care
•	 Organ-specific disease requiring inpatient care from a specialist team
•	 Frail older patients, for whom comprehensive geriatric assessment (Chapter 68) is needed.
An acute physician requires the clinical skills to manage patients with a broad range of clinical problems, and
in each of the care streams described above. This chapter focuses on same-day emergency care (Box 101.1).
Same-day emergency care evolved from ambulatory emergency care and they are, for all practical purposes,
synonymous.
Same-day emergency care (SDEC)
This is usually run by specialists in acute medicine, but can also be part of emergency medicine, surgery or
paediatrics. Delivery requires rapid assessment by a senior physician, usually a consultant.
Referrals are accepted from (Figure 101.1)
•	 The emergency department
•	 General practitioners and community nurses
Same-day emergency care
Vincent Connolly
CHAPTER 101
An effective SDEC service can improve patient care and system efficiency.
The essentials for a highly functioning service are:
•	 Senior clinician presence throughout the opening hours
•	 Clear patient-selection criteria
•	 Agreed pathways for high-volume clinical presentations
•	 Access to a multi-disciplinary team to support care plans for older people
•	 Appropriate infrastructure to meet the demand, particularly staffing
Box 101.1  Same-day emergency care (SDEC)

<!-- page:739 -->
720
Acute Medicine
•	 Inpatient wards as part of a step-down approach to discharge
•	 Other hospitals and clinics
Many SDEC units will receive patients directly from the ambulance service usually preceded by a telephone
referral to a senior clinician.
•	 If suitable for SDEC, the patient and relatives or carers must be informed that the plan is for same-day care
then discharge, since the initial expectation after referral is often that an inpatient admission will be
needed.
•	 The initial assessment must establish that the patient is safe in the SDEC setting.
Is the clinical condition suitable for SDEC?
Is the patient actually well enough for early outpatient review? Alternatively, is the patient sick enough to
require inpatient admission? National Early Warning Score (NEWS) can help, but must be interpreted individually in the clinical context and working diagnosis. For example, a patient on long-term domiciliary oxygen may
have a high NEWS but be clinically stable and suitable for AEC; a young person with low oxygen saturation
levels may not trigger concern, even with a sub-massive PE. A clinical conversation between the referring and
accepting clinicians is important in establishing that an individual patient can be safely managed in SDEC.
Triage.
Assess using ABCDE method
Key observations (Table 1.1)
Focused history: major problems,
context and comorbidities
Admit to AEC centre
Further assessment
Observation
Treatment
Liaison with speciality team (Table 2)
Discharge, with GP/
speciality follow-up
if needed
Admit to appropriate
ward
Patient with an acute medical problem
 • Referral from GP
 • Referral from ED
 • Referral from other hospital or clinic
Patient clinically unstable?
Yes
Stabilize
Admit to appropriate ward
No
Patient suitable for AEC (Table 1)?
Admit to acute medical unit
or appropriate ward.
No
Yes
Figure 101.1  Same-day emergency care (SDEC) in acute medicine.

<!-- page:740 -->
Same-day emergency care
721
The Amb score (Table 101.1) is also useful. A composite score of 5 or more suggests that the patient is suitable for AEC. The Amb score can be a particularly useful tool when less experienced staff are responsible for
streaming, to help build confidence in the process.
Can the AEC unit deliver the required care?
Is there access to required back-up services: diagnostics; support by a community heart failure team; and ability
to give parenteral antibiotics seven days a week?
Are staffing levels adequate in the face of current patient load and concerns like sickness and annual
leave?
Can the SDEC unit cope with the patient’s personal needs?
These include feeding, toileting and behaviour. It is possible, indeed it should be encouraged, to manage
frail  older people with confusion or delirium in the AEC unit if the appropriate staff and facilities are
available.
Patient presentations to SDEC
The clinical scenarios suitable for management in the SDEC unit are in four main categories.
Diagnostic exclusion
Examples include
•	 Chest pain with no acute ECG changes and low coronary risk. The patients can await troponin assays on
SDEC.
•	 Sudden onset severe headache in the absence of other neurological symptoms or signs. Exclusion of subarachnoid haemorrhage or other potentially serious diagnoses, with a computed tomography (CT) of the
brain and possibly a lumbar puncture, can be delivered in SDEC.
Table 101.1  The Amb score.
Factor
Score
1 if applicable, 0 if not applicable
Female sex
Age <80 years
Has access to personal/public transport
IV treatment not anticipated
Not acutely confused
National Early Warning Score = 0
Not discharged from hospital within previous 30 days
Total Amb score
0–7
A score of 5 or more suggests the patient is suitable for AEC

<!-- page:741 -->
722
Acute Medicine
•	 Suspected pulmonary embolism if haemodynamically stable. A CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) (see
Chapter 31) according to clinical scores can be performed.
•	 Non-specific abdominal pain can be assessed and investigated in SDEC with appropriate onward referral if
required.
Management of specific conditions
Patients may present with an easily recognizable diagnosis, for example DVT, cellulitis, atrial fibrillation, for
which the patient requires a clinical management plan. There is often a need for confirmatory diagnostic tests,
which should be readily available, or in the case of cellulitis, an outpatient parenteral intravenous antibiotic
service. The patient may need to return to the SDEC service for ongoing management or referral to another
service for follow-up.
Management after risk-stratification
This group of clinical scenarios uses validated risk stratification tools to identify suitable patients for SDEC.
Examples include the Glasgow–Blatchford score for acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding, the Hestia score for
suspected pulmonary embolism and the CURB-65 score for pneumonia. These scoring systems stratify patients
as to their suitability for an SDEC management pathway. This supports clinical decision-making but is not a
substitute for it. The stratification tools should be readily available for use, with the result recorded in the
healthcare records.
Procedures
Some important clinical procedures can be performed, for example lumbar puncture, drainage of pleural effusions, knee aspiration and abdominal paracentesis. These may not be true emergencies, but are needed quickly
for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes. Referrals in the evening can be seen the next day for the procedure,
with follow-up investigations and referral as individually appropriate.
The procedures should always be carried out or directly supervised by a competent senior clinician. Another
benefit of this model is that it is a training opportunity for junior medical staff.
The frail older patient
Frail older people are often admitted to hospital beds, although the clinical presentation with significant functional decline does not suggest serious illness. The involvement of a multi-disciplinary team within SDEC or
closely aligned to SDEC can support the patient’s needs. For example, an elderly patient who has fallen and
fractured the inferior pubic ramus requires analgesia, walking and toileting aids at home and regular home
visits until their functional status has returned to normal. This can all be initiated in an SDEC service without
hospital admission.
Many SDEC services do not care for confusion or delirium, but some tailor their resources to support management at home.

<!-- page:742 -->
Same-day emergency care
723
Alignment with other services
Virtual ward and hospital-at-home services have developed rapidly since the COVID-19 pandemic. These services and SDEC have a similar ethos which is to provide effective safe care close to home. There is significant
overlap in respect of
•	 Patient groups, e.g. frail elderly, chronic respiratory disease
•	 Clinical skills
•	 Supporting services
While each of these three services has important individual features, it is important that they operate in a
coordinated way, e.g. sharing protocols and guidelines and that the staff have skills to enable them to work
across boundaries rather than move the patient between services.
SDEC infrastructure and processes
Location
Many of the lessons concerning the development of SDEC mirror those learned in the development of day
surgery.
The unit consists of offices and trolleys and placing it close to the emergency department or acute medicine
unit increases referrals. The importance of a specified unit is that it helps the team work toward a culture of
supporting patient care at home.
Staffing
Adequate staffing capacity to match the demand for services. Typically, a consultant should be available for
12 h/day with support from junior medical staff. There will be a mix of nurse practitioners, staff nurses and
healthcare assistants. Some units combine medical and surgical SDEC by sharing the facilities and nursing staff.
Diagnostic support
Diagnostic support for the SDEC service is needed, for example designated slots for Doppler ultrasound for
DVT, CTPAs for suspected pulmonary embolism or an agreement to provide imaging within specified time
scales, such as CT head scans within 1 h of request. Others offer a designated number of slots for radiological
tests. The time scales for diagnostics need to reflect the overall timescales for the effective operation of the
AEC unit; this should include the reporting of any imaging. Many units have individuals trained in the use of
ultrasound. Increasingly near patient testing is being used to reduce delays in blood test results.
Pathways and checklists
Local pathways for common clinical scenarios reduce the variability of care and increase speed and efficiency.
Exclusion criteria should be minimized.
A safety checklist incorporated into the healthcare records helps to ensure that vital checks are carried out,
for example:
•	 NEWS check
•	 Pain management
•	 Cannula check
•	 Radiology results
•	 Medication advice
Follow-up arrangements should be agreed.

<!-- page:743 -->
724
Acute Medicine
Patient information
Patients should be provided with a simple information booklet explaining the SDEC service, the working diagnosis, treatment plan and follow-up arrangements. The booklet should include what to do in the event of
symptom recurrence or treatment complications, with a contact telephone number for in hours and out of
hours. This provides a safety net for the patient and feedback for the team.
Networking
The back-up network of services (Table 101.2) should be made aware of the SDEC service, in particular where
it is and how it operates. The option of being able to make direct patient referrals especially out of hours and
at weekends can significantly improve the quality of patient care. These services contribute to educating the
patient about their chronic conditions.
Audit
Audit data should be collected to monitor the AEC unit’s safety and effectiveness:
•	 Outcome metrics:
•	 Mortality rate in acute medicine
•	 Proportion of patients returning directly to their own home
•	 Process metrics:
•	 Percentage of patients assessed within 15 min of arrival
•	 Percentage of patients that have a medical assessment within 60 min
•	 Balancing metric:
•	 Percentage of patients with unexpected re-attending or re-admission within seven days
Further reading
Connolly V, Thompson D. (2014) Acute Care Toolkit 10: Ambulatory Emergency Care. London: RCP. https://
www.rcplondon.ac.uk/guidelines-policy/acute-care-toolkit-10-ambulatory-emergency-care.
Dean S,  Barratt J. (2023) What is the existing evidence base for adult medical same day emergency care in
UK NHS hospitals? A scoping review protocol. BMJ Open 13(10), e071890. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2023-071890.
Table 101.2  Clinical teams in the same-day emergency care network.
•	 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease outreach team
•	 Rapid access chest pain clinic
•	 Transient ischaemic attack/stroke clinic
•	 Pleural diseases clinic
•	 Pain management team
•	 Falls clinic
•	 Multi-disciplinary functional assessment team
•	 Rapid response team
•	 Diabetes nurse specialist
•	 Palliative care team
•	 Heart failure team
•	 Hospital at home
•	 Virtual ward
