# CHAPTER 104 Capacity and consent

- Pages: 761-767
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:761 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
742
It is an accepted principle that patients have a right to autonomy and self-determination with respect to
choices in medical assessment, investigation and treatment (or lack thereof). The role of a physician is to ensure
that patients are aware of this and present them with sufficient information, and in such a way, as to promote
decision-making. This is at the heart of the physician-patient relationship. There is a competing right, which
is that those patients who lack capacity to make a specific treatment decision must be treated in their best
interests, ideally after consulting those close to the patient. To ignore the wishes of a patient who has capacity
to make a decision, or not to treat a patient who lacks capacity in their best interests, could open the doctor
to legal or professional misconduct claims.
Legislation and case law specific to England and Wales are used in this chapter to illustrate principles of
capacity and consent which are relevant across a wide range of jurisdictions.
The General Medical Council of England and Wales (GMC) has outlined seven principles of decision-making
and consent:
1	 All patients have the right to be involved in decisions about their treatment and care and be supported to
make informed decisions if they are able.
2	 Decision-making is an ongoing process focused on meaningful dialogue: the exchange of relevant information specific to the individual patient.
3	 All patients have the right to be listened to, and to be given the information they need to make a decision
and the time and support they need to understand it.
4	 Medical professionals must try to find out what matters to patients so they can share relevant information
about the benefits and harms of proposed options and reasonable alternatives, including the option to take
no action.
5	 Medical professionals must start from the presumption that all adult patients have capacity to make decisions about their treatment and care. A patient can only be judged to lack capacity to make a specific decision at a specific time, and only after assessment in line with legal requirements.
6	 The choice of treatment or care for patients who lack capacity must be of overall benefit to them, and
decisions should be made in consultation with those who are close to them or advocating for them.
7	 Patients whose right to consent is affected by law should be supported to be involved in the decisionmaking process and to exercise choice if possible.
There is helpful and specific guidance on how to support patients to make decisions (including the use of
independent advocates), how to enlist the support of others in the multi-disciplinary team and how to record
decisions.
Capacity and consent
Kezia Lange
CHAPTER 104

<!-- page:762 -->
Capacity and consent
743
Capacity
Capacity refers to the ability to make a decision. A patient’s capacity may vary with age and circumstance, medical condition and time (even within hours), and so capacity is both time-specific and
decision-specific. Patients can regain capacity rapidly (after treatment for hypoglycaemia, for instance)
or be unlikely to (e.g. in advanced dementia). It is important not to presume that a person may (or may
not) have capacity – a patient with schizophrenia with paranoid delusions may lack capacity to make
decisions about their treatment for mental illness, but may have capacity to accept or reject specific
treatment for their diabetes.
Although legislation and common law vary across jurisdictions, most follow the same basic ‘test’ for
capacity:
A patient has capacity if they can:
1	 Understand the information relevant to the specific decision in question and
2	 Retain that information and
3	 Use (weigh and balance) the information and
4	 Communicate their decision.
In England and Wales, the Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) has codified the common law and, together
with its Code of Practice, protects the rights of people from the age of 16 years who lack the capacity to make
decisions, and sets out the obligations of staff working with these patients.
It outlines a ‘two-stage test’:
Is there an impairment or disturbance in the functioning of their mind or brain? This could be anything from
a head injury to encephalitis, overwhelming emotion, intoxication or dehydration. It may be temporary or
permanent.
If so, has this caused the patient to be unable to make a decision? This is the case if the patient cannot
understand, retain and use the information provided, or communicate the decision. An unconscious patient
clearly cannot do any of these. A delirious patient might be able to communicate, but not retain or weigh
the information. A patient with learning disability might be able to do all of the elements of the test, with
appropriate support, time and facilitation of the discussion.
If the patient has an impairment that renders them, on the balance of probabilities, unable to make a
decision, then that patient lacks capacity to make that decision.
How (and when) to assess capacity?
A systematic review by Lepping et al. looked at 23 studies that estimated the prevalence of patients lacking
capacity to consent to treatment or admission in medical settings. The weighted average proportion of
patients who lacked capacity was 34% (95% CI 25–44%). Raymont et  al. studied 302 consecutively
recruited acute medical in-patients and estimated that 40% did not have capacity to make treatment decisions. Clinical teams, however, tended not to recognise this. It is common that capacity is only assessed
when a patient (or family) opposes the treatment suggested, and the MCA legislated to provide safeguards
for the ‘non-capacitous but compliant’ group of patients. It is not unusual to be on an acute medicine ward
with patients with dementia who clearly cannot consent to treatment, without any legal basis for their
treatment being documented. All physicians should remind themselves to document capacity and make
the  necessary decisions based on that assessment, in order to comply with the law and professional
standards.
Jayes et al. undertook a systematic review of mental capacity assessments undertaken by health and social
care professionals in England and Wales which demonstrated that assessment practices varied widely and were
not always consistent with the MCA. Capacity assessments were often ‘general’ rather than decision-specific,

<!-- page:763 -->
744
Acute Medicine
presumed lack of capacity based on diagnosis, and did not take into account patients’ culture, ethnic or
religious backgrounds which might have an effect on their decision-making.
Fundamental to an assessment of capacity is taking the time to speak to your patient (and sometimes others)
to understand what support they might need to be able to make a decision and to have exhausted reasonable
efforts to do so before concluding they are unable to make a decision (lack capacity). It is also necessary to take
all contextual information into account, about their existing beliefs and background but also their physical
health history, and their behaviour and expressed wishes since arrival in hospital and ideally before. Clearly,
the requirement to consult or take time may well be superseded by a need to intervene immediately and the
legislation accepts this necessity in a medical emergency.
Difficult capacity assessments
Whenever there are difficult capacity assessments, or clear disagreement with either patients or carers,
colleagues with specialist expertise should be consulted. This might, for example, be a psychiatric liaison team,
speech and language therapy team or learning disability specialist service.
Anorexia nervosa
Patients with anorexia who are admitted to acute medical wards are usually significantly medically and psychiatrically unwell. A core symptom of anorexia is the strong cognitive distortion that makes patients believe they
are overweight, and that they should not take in calories. This might mean that the patient can understand
and retain the information (for instance that they have deranged biochemistry or hypoglycaemia and that this
may result in their death if untreated) but state that they would prefer to refuse treatment if it involved, for
instance, glucose in their intravenous fluids. What must be recognised is that the core of their disease – the
overvalued idea of being overweight – is strongly affecting their ability to use and weigh that information.
If they were not suffering from anorexia, would they weigh the information in the same way? They are likely
to lack capacity if anorectic cognitions are very prominent. The ‘Medical Emergencies in Eating Disorders’
(MEED) guidance may be helpful.
Substance misuse disorders
Patients may well lack capacity when acutely intoxicated, but regain capacity to make treatment decisions
once they have sobered up. It is under-recognised that a proportion of patients with chronic substance misuse
(particularly alcohol) may have significant cognitive impairment and may lack capacity with regards to decisions
about issues which affect safe discharge – particularly around finances, accommodation and the decision to
continue misusing substances. Social work colleagues are helpful in this situation.
Patients with emotional dysregulation/self-harm
All patients who have been admitted under medicine who have self-harmed, particularly those with a background of emotional dysregulation, should have their capacity assessed on admission and regularly as required.
Those who are depressed may lack capacity if the strong negative cognitions common to this disorder affect
the way they are able to weigh options (again, you can think of whether the patient would make the same
choice if they were not depressed?). Some patients suffer from emotional dysregulation: this is a symptom
experienced by many patients suffering from complex post traumatic stress disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, emotionally unstable personality disorder and autism spectrum condition. These patients may
feel overwhelmed (triggered, for example, by sensory issues, memories or feelings of rejection) and may selfharm as a way of managing or wishing to escape these feelings. It is important to recognise that when such
patients remain overwhelmed and acutely distressed, they may continue to be at risk of further self-harm, and
may lack capacity to make treatment decisions until these feelings reduce in intensity. Complex presentations

<!-- page:764 -->
Capacity and consent
745
include patients who dissociate, so appear very calm and may appear to be understanding and using information, but their actions (tying ligatures on the ward, for instance) indicate their on-going distress. It is helpful to
discuss such patients early with liaison psychiatry colleagues, or community clinicians who know the patient, if
available.
How to manage a patient who lacks capacity
It is not sufficient to document that a patient lacks capacity to make treatment decisions: you should document
what the proposed treatment is and when capacity should be reviewed. The MCA requires patients who lack
capacity to be treated in their ‘best interests’. The treating clinician is the decision-maker unless the patient has
a valid Lasting Power of Attorney (LPA) for medical issues, a court-appointed Deputy or advance directive that
applies to the current medication situation. There are requirements, other than in an emergency if it is impracticable, to consult the patient’s carers and, where necessary, use an independent mental capacity advocate to
help guide decision-making. Ill treatment or wilful neglect of a person who lacks capacity has been made a
criminal offence under the MCA.
For patients who have longer-term conditions which mean they are unlikely to regain capacity to make
treatment decisions, and their care is likely to involve a deprivation of liberty, a ‘DoLS’ (Deprivation of Liberty
Safeguards) order will need to be applied for. The hospital safeguarding or social work team should work
alongside the acute medicine team to ensure that there are appropriate procedures in place.
Consent
Consent is the process of obtaining permission from a patient before performing any treatment, examination
or investigation. The patient must have capacity to make the decision, and the exchange of information
between doctor and patient forms part of the capacity assessment, as well as the process of obtaining informed
consent. The GMC provides detailed guidance and refers to providing patients with the ‘information they want
or need to make a decision’, that the information is objective and that doctors should ‘be aware of how your
own preferences might influence the advice you give’. This is in line with the new medicolegal standard as set
by the decision in the Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board (2015) case which shifted the test from the
whether the doctor’s conduct would be supported by a reasonable body of medical opinion (Bolam v Friern
Hospital Management 1957) to the ‘reasonable patient’ test: whether, in the circumstances of the particular
case, a reasonable person in the patient’s position would be likely to attach significance to the risk, or the doctor
is, or should reasonably be, aware that the particular patient would be likely to attach significance to it. Further
case law has clarified the need to provide patients with both accurate information and ‘adequate time and
space’ to make a decision as well as giving proper weight to patients’ wishes, feelings, beliefs and values. There
is an on-going trend in both regulatory and medicolegal advice to reduce medical paternalism and empower
patients, with good communication between doctors and their patients being key to consent.
Mental Health Act (MHA)
The Mental Health Act (MHA) 1983 is legislation in England and Wales that provides safeguards for those
patients who are detained for treatment of their mental illness, which cannot be provided outside of hospital
due to the risks posed to the patient or others. The MHA does not authorise treatment of other illnesses,
although there is provision for patients to be treated for the ‘direct consequences’ of their mental illness (such
as in the treatment for anorexia nervosa) in certain circumstances. However, it is unusual for patients to be
detained at an acute hospital under the MHA, and the MCA is more usually used. Patients may be transferred
from a psychiatric hospital, while detained under the MHA for treatment of a medical illness, and the patient’s
capacity should be assessed as with any other patient. The effect of the patient’s mental illness may or may not
influence their capacity to make treatment decisions regarding their medical condition.

<!-- page:765 -->
746
Acute Medicine
Further reading
General Medical Council (n.d.). The seven principles of decision making and consent. Retrieved from https://
www.gmc-uk.org/professional-standards/professional-standards-for-doctors/decision-making-and-consent/
the-seven-principles-of-decision-making-and-consent.
General Medical Guidance: Decision Making and consent Decision making and consent – professional
standards – GMC (updated-decision-making-and-consent-guidance-english-09_11_20_pdf-84176092.pdf).
Jayes M, Pamer R, Pamela Enderby AS. (2020) How do health and social care professionals in England and
Wales assess mental capacity? A literature review. Disabil Rehabil 42(19), 2797–2808. DOI: 10.1080/
09638288.2019.1572793.
Lepping P, Stanly T, Turner J. (2015) Systematic review on the prevalance of lack of capacity in medical and
psychiatric settings. Clin Med (Lond) 15(4), 337–343. DOI: 10.7861/clinmedicine.15-4-337.
Medical Emergencies in Eating Disorders: Guidance on Recognition and Management. (2023) Royal College
of Psychiatrists. https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/docs/default-source/improving-care/better-mh-policy/
college-reports/college-report-cr233-medical-emergencies-in-eating-disorders-(meed)-guidance.pdf.
Office of the Public Guardian (2007) Mental Capacity Act 2005 Code of Practice. TSO (The Stationery Office)
2007. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5f6cc6138fa8f541f6763295/Mental-capacity-act-
code-of-practice.pdf.
Raymont V, Bingley W. (2004) Prevalence of mental incapacity in medical inpatients and associated risk
factors: cross-sectional study. Lancet 364(9443), 1421–1427. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17224-3.

<!-- page:766 -->
Practical Procedures
SECTION 16
