# CHAPTER 105 Airway management and upper airway obstruction

- Pages: 768-777
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:768 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
749
Definitions
Management of the upper airway, which runs from the mouth and nose to the carina, has two
fundamental aims
1	 Maintenance of a patent passage for free movement of gas between the respiratory portion of the
lungs and the atmosphere.
2	 Prevention of soiling of the lungs by vomitus or other material.
Upper airway obstruction (UAO) is a condition where functional or mechanical factors lead to loss of normal
airway architecture and patency, compromising ventilation.
Overview
UAO is a life-threatening medical emergency. Precipitous deterioration may occur without warning, so
treatment must be swift. Intervention may need to precede a definitive diagnosis.
Airway compromise may be
•	 Functional: due to impairment of consciousness or neurological disease in a patient with an anatomically
normal airway. This situation is commonly encountered by the Acute Physician. Simple interventions may be
sufficient whilst the underlying problem is identified and treated.
•	 Mechanical: physical obstruction of the airway by a foreign body, tumour or oedema, for example. Critical
care, anaesthetic and ENT expertise are often required, though temporising measures are important whilst
help is awaited.
•	 Due to a combination of functional and mechanical factors: any functional cause of airway compromise may
ultimately be complicated by mechanical obstruction, for example aspiration of vomitus in a patient intoxicated with alcohol. Likewise, uncorrected mechanical obstruction eventually results in exhaustion, asphyxia
and loss of consciousness.
Obstruction tends to occur at sites of anatomical narrowing and the causes and clinical features
differ according to the level, though no sign or symptom is pathognomonic. The time course and degree of
obstruction are also important (Table 105.1).
Airway management and upper
airway obstruction
Matthew C. Frise
CHAPTER 105

<!-- page:769 -->
750
Acute Medicine
Differential diagnosis
Any medical cause of reduced consciousness may lead to UAO. Common examples include
•	 Intoxication: alcohol, opioids, benzodiazepines
•	 Intracranial haemorrhage, or extensive infarction leading to cerebral oedema
•	 Hepatic encephalopathy
•	 Seizures
•	 Meningitis or encephalitis
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Severe sepsis
Patients with existing obstructive sleep apnoea are at particularly high risk.
Common mechanical causes of UAO are given in Table 105.2.
Priorities
The priority is to maintain or re-establish airway patency to permit adequate ventilation, whilst preventing
aspiration.
1	 In the specific situation where the patient is conscious and there are features suggestive of acute severe
airway obstruction by a foreign body (choking), treat according to Adult BLS guidelines with alternating
sequences of five intrascapular back blows and five abdominal thrusts.
Table 105.1  Clinical features of upper airway obstruction.
Acute partial obstruction
Respiratory distress – dyspnoea, tachypnoea, short sentences, agitation and diaphoresis
Coughing, choking, gagging and altered voice
Grunting and snoring – partial obstruction of pharynx by soft palate or epiglottis
Stridor
Drooling and gurgling
Paradoxical chest wall movements and supraclavicular retraction
Dermal ecchymoses and subcutaneous emphysema – if very forceful respiratory effort
Negative pressure pulmonary oedema – may be misdiagnosed as acute heart failure
Rapid decompensation and progression to complete obstruction
Subacute or chronic partial obstruction
May be almost asymptomatic at rest if develops gradually
Dyspnoea and tachypnoea
Stridor
Voice change
Hypercapnic ventilatory failure
Sudden progression to complete obstruction
Complete obstruction
Inability to breathe and speak
May clasp throat between thumb and index finger to indicate choking
Agitation and panic
Cyanosis
Vigorous respiratory effort becoming feeble as consciousness lost
Respiratory arrest, bradycardia and hypotension followed swiftly by cardiac arrest if not relieved

<!-- page:770 -->
Airway management and upper airway obstruction
751
2	 Give high-flow supplemental oxygen via non-rebreathe mask whilst making a rapid clinical assessment. The airway may be lost at any time leading respiratory and ultimately cardiac arrest, so do not withhold oxygen due to misplaced concerns about toxicity.
3	 If there are any features suggestive of anaphylaxis give IM adrenaline 500 μg immediately and summon
help. Treat according to Advanced Life Support (ALS) guidelines (Chapter 4). If there is cardiovascular instability raise the legs rather than laying the patient down and do not instrument the airway unless suitably
experienced. If the patient becomes unresponsive or arrests in the meantime follow ALS guidelines (Chapter 1).
4	 Secure IV access, ideally large bore. At least two IV access points should be available as rapid-sequence
intubation (RSI) may be required.
5	 If the patient is conscious obtain a brief history; yes/no answers may be all that is possible. Look closely
at the thorax, head, and neck for swelling, masses, previous surgical scars (especially from tracheostomy or
neck dissection), distended veins or distorted anatomy. Listen carefully for stridor. If the features suggest
mechanical obstruction summon urgent ENT assistance. Optimise the patient’s position and stay at the
bedside.
6	 If the patient is unconscious and has signs of obstruction such as snoring, check the airway is clear of debris,
suction if necessary and manipulate the airway to see if obstruction can be relieved. Consider an oro-
or nasopharyngeal airway. If the patient is breathing place them in the recovery position with adjuncts and
supplemental oxygen in situ. If there is concern about a cervical spine injury, use manual in-line stabilisation,
but the airway takes priority.
7	 If there is inadequate or absent respiratory effort despite relief of obstruction, ask for the arrest
team to be summoned whilst commencing bag-mask ventilation (BMV) using 100% oxygen. If this is
ineffective, insert a supraglottic airway such as a laryngeal mask airway. If still ineffective and more experienced help is yet to arrive, attempt endotracheal intubation only if appropriately experienced. If at any
point cardiac output is lost, follow the ALS algorithm.
Table 105.2  Some examples of mechanical causes of airway obstruction in adults.
Oedema
Anaphylaxis
Angioedema – angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, C1 inhibitor deficiency
Post-extubation laryngeal oedema – typically a few hours after extubation
Extrinsic compression
Thyroid masses – benign or malignant
Lymphadenopathy of any cause
Neck haematoma, e.g. arterial puncture complicating central venous access
Tumours of the airway
Laryngeal carcinoma
Tracheal carcinoma
Infection
Retropharyngeal abscess
Ludwig’s angina
Laryngitis and epiglottitis
Vocal cord paralysis
Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy of any cause
Cricoarytenoid disease in rheumatoid arthritis
Trauma
Acute laryngeal trauma
Facial fractures and associated haemorrhage
Thermal inhalation injury to mucosa
Tracheal stenosis following intubation or tracheostomy
Foreign bodies

<!-- page:771 -->
752
Acute Medicine
It is essential not to make the situation worse
•	 Often simple manoeuvres are all that are required until more experienced help arrives.
•	 In certain situations, such as tracheal compression or laryngeal tumours, even lying the patient flat can be
enough to provoke complete UAO and respiratory arrest. The conscious patient will often try to
assume the position that best relieves obstruction - help the patient to do this.
•	 The use of airway adjuncts and attempted intubation in inexperienced hands may worsen the situation and
make subsequent attempts at establishing a definitive airway more difficult. Attempt the simplest and
least invasive maneuverers first and do so carefully. Use techniques with which you are experienced and
confident.
•	 Sedative drugs must be used with extreme caution in patients with possible UAO; sedation before the
airway is secured may precipitate respiratory arrest.
Non-invasive techniques
Manual manipulation of the airway
•	 Head tilt and chin lift: may be enough to relieve airway obstruction in a patient with reduced consciousness (Figure 105.1).
•	 Jaw thrust: preferred if there is concern over an unstable cervical spine (Figure 105.2).
Suction
•	 If vomit, secretions, or other debris are present in the oropharynx these can be removed with a wide-bore
rigid Yankauer sucker, to relieve obstruction and prevent aspiration.
Figure 105.1  Head tilt and chin lift. Source: Taken from 4th edition.

<!-- page:772 -->
Airway management and upper airway obstruction
753
•	 A flexible suction catheter can also be passed through an oro- or nasopharyngeal airway.
•	 Care must be taken not to cause mucosal injury and bleeding; provoking vomiting or laryngospasm are also
risks in semi-conscious patients.
Oropharyngeal airways
•	 In unconscious patients, obstruction may occur in an anatomically normal airway due to loss of
muscle tone with collapse at the level of the soft palate, epiglottis or tongue base. An oropharyngeal
(Guedel) airway may restore airway patency sufficient for spontaneous or bag-mask ventilation (BMV) to be
effective.
•	 The length should be approximately that from the angle of the mandible to the incisors; insert with the
concavity facing the palate and rotate 180° into final position (Figure 105.3).
•	 Obstruction may be worsened if the epiglottis is pushed against the laryngeal inlet or the tongue displaced posteriorly; laryngospasm may also result – try a smaller size or nasopharyngeal airway if so.
Nasopharyngeal airway
•	 As an alternative to the oropharyngeal airway, a soft lubricated tube may be inserted into the nostril.
Remember that the floor of the nose is horizontal.
Figure 105.2  Jaw thrust. Source: Taken from 4th edition.
(b)
(a)
Figure 105.3  Insertion of an oropharyngeal (Guedel) airway. The device may be inserted upside-down (a) before
rotation into final position (b). Source: Taken from 4th edition.

<!-- page:773 -->
754
Acute Medicine
•	 Often better tolerated in patients with disturbed consciousness than the oropharyngeal airway.
•	 Epistaxis may result, and if too long, laryngospasm and vomiting are risks as with an oropharyngeal airway.
Contraindicated in those with a possible base of skull fracture.
Bag-mask ventilation
•	 Rather than an airway management technique per se, this is a treatment for inadequate ventilation,
usually in an unconscious patient with UAO.
•	 Inadequate ventilation due to a poor seal can be improved by repositioning or a two-handed technique
(Figure 105.4); bearded and edentulous patients can be particularly troublesome – keep well-fitting dentures
in place.
•	 Some devices feature a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve which is very useful for managing airway obstruction due to laryngospasm.
•	 Over-ventilation may cause barotrauma, pneumothorax or cardiovascular compromise and should
be avoided; gastric insufflation increases the risk of vomiting and aspiration. Aim for a tidal volume of
6–10 mL/kg.
Supraglottic airways: laryngeal mask airway (LMATM) and i-gel®
•	 The LMA is inserted blindly into the oropharynx to sit over the laryngeal inlet. It is not a definitive airway
and does not allow ventilation with high airway pressures nor provide the same level of protection against
soiling as a cuffed endotracheal tube (ETT).
•	 Even in inexperienced hands, the rate of successful insertion is high, making LMAs very useful in the
emergency setting. ALS guidance now emphasises that they are preferred initially over endotracheal
intubation in the arrest situation.
Figure 105.4  Two-person bag-mask ventilation with a two-handed mask technique to achieve a good seal. Note
positioning of the patient’s head and use of jaw thrust. Source: Taken from 4th edition.

<!-- page:774 -->
Airway management and upper airway obstruction
755
•	 The i-gel® – like an LMA but with a soft, non-inflatable cuff – is increasingly used in preference to the classical LMA. Familiarize yourself with the particular supraglottic airways available on your cardiac arrest
trolleys in advance of needing one.
•	 Supraglottic airways are not helpful if the level of obstruction is at or below the larynx.
Medical therapies for mechanical upper airway obstruction
Nebulised adrenaline – sometimes used to treat laryngeal oedema in patients with partial UAO who remain
conscious and self-ventilating, based largely on case series in adults, rather than good evidence. A typical dose
is 1 mL of a 1  :  1000 solution diluted with saline to 5 mL. It is not a substitute for IM adrenaline in
anaphylaxis.
Corticosteroids – widely used in adults despite sparse evidence (even in the setting of anaphylaxis). Some
studies suggest a reduction in post-extubation laryngeal oedema with prophylactic use. Typically used doses
are hydrocortisone 100–200 mg IV or dexamethasone 10 mg IV or IM.
Heliox – a mixture of at least 70% helium in oxygen, heliox reduces the work of breathing by diminishing
turbulent flow in the partially obstructed airway, but its use may be limited by concomitant lung disease requiring a higher fraction of inspired oxygen. Most research has involved patients with obstructive lung disease, rather
than UAO. It is only a temporising measure and does nothing to correct the underlying pathology.
Endotracheal intubation
A GCS of ≤8 is often taken as an indication to intubate a patient for airway protection, but this
threshold originates from work in trauma patients. Any degree of impairment of consciousness is associated
with an increased risk of aspiration, though many medical patients in this category may reasonably be managed in a closely monitored environment with equipment and personnel on hand to intervene if necessary.
Testing the gag reflex is not useful for predicting aspiration risk.
Endotracheal intubation provides a definitive airway permitting mechanical ventilation (with
high airway pressures if needed) and protection from aspiration and is therefore considered a gold
standard. However, there are several caveats
•	 Cardiac arrest: guidance now emphasises the harm that may result from interruption of cardiac massage by
repeated intubation attempts; the LMA is preferred unless a Critical Care Physician or Anaesthetist is
immediately on hand.
•	 Mechanical UAO: airway anatomy may be seriously distorted leading to difficult intubation. The advent of
video laryngoscopy has probably improved rates of first-pass intubation, but the decision to sedate, paralyse
and attempt endotracheal intubation with direct or video laryngoscopy should only be taken only by a clinician with appropriate expertise.
•	 The comatose patient: if airway protection is the primary aim, intubation may be straightforward, but measures to reduce the risk of aspiration during the procedure should be considered. These include cricoid pressure during an RSI and placement of a nasogastric tube to empty the stomach beforehand, although
this has the potential itself to provoke vomiting and aspiration.
If intubation is performed it is essential to confirm correct tube placement by a combination of
methods rather than any one in isolation
•	 Direct visualisation: the tube is seen to pass between the vocal cords.
•	 Measurement of expired carbon dioxide by capnography: resuscitation trolleys should include indicator
devices that can be attached to the endotracheal tube to detect carbon dioxide. Beware false-positive results
from initial breaths after oesophageal intubation with an insufflated stomach, and false-negative results in
cardiac arrest.
•	 Auscultation over the epigastrium and bilaterally over the thorax.
•	 Portable CXR: to confirm where the tip of the tube lies and exclude complications such as
pneumothorax.

<!-- page:775 -->
756
Acute Medicine
Complications
•	 Failure
•	 Oesophageal intubation – devastating if unrecognised
•	 Laryngeal trauma
•	 Aspiration
•	 Cardiovascular instability from laryngeal stimulation and anaesthetic drugs
•	 Post-extubation airway obstruction
•	 Laryngeal and tracheal stenosis (late)
The Combitube (oesophageal–tracheal double-lumen airway) has been developed to have the benefits of a
cuffed ETT but with easy insertion. It is blindly inserted into the oropharynx and ventilation can be delivered
via either of two ports depending on where the device has settled. If unfamiliar with this device it is better
to use an LMA.
Further management
Making a diagnosis
Once acute measures to control the airway are in place and any other resuscitation priorities
addressed, investigations should be undertaken to determine the underlying diagnosis if this is not
already evident. Disorders of consciousness that have compromised the airway should be managed
as discussed in Chapter 3. For mechanical UAO several approaches are available
•	 Fibreoptic endoscopy: allows visualisation of the upper airway under local anaesthesia usually via the nose,
but may also be performed orally or via an ETT or tracheostomy. It has the advantage of also permitting
awake fibreoptic intubation of a patient with UAO who can sit up and cooperate, avoiding the risks of
an RSI in this setting.
•	 Radiographs: plain films of the thorax and neck may be helpful initial tests for demonstrating the location of
a foreign body or tracheal distortion and can be undertaken in the resuscitation room without the need to
move the patient. These may also reveal evidence of complications such as aspiration, negative pressure
pulmonary oedema or pneumothorax.
•	 CT: in a stable patient who can lie flat, or once a definitive airway has been secured, CT gives excellent crosssectional imaging of the relevant anatomy and will reveal most pathologies of interest.
Surgical airway
Some causes of UAO, such as anaphylaxis, are reasonably quickly reversible and extubation can be attempted
once the patient has recovered from the acute event. If the cause of UAO is one which is not likely to be quickly
reversible, such as a laryngeal tumour or bilateral vocal cord paralysis, then it will be necessary to fashion a
surgical airway. Formation of a tracheostomy is increasingly undertaken by critical care physicians percutaneously using the Seldinger technique. For the patient with UAO, anatomical considerations may make surgical
formation in theatre preferable.
Problems
Transporting the patient
If a patient with a compromised airway and/or impaired consciousness requires transfer to another area, such
as for diagnostic imaging, careful consideration should be given to intubation beforehand. Doing so in a
controlled manner and well-resourced environment of the resuscitation room is far preferable to attempting

<!-- page:776 -->
Airway management and upper airway obstruction
757
advanced airway interventions in a CT scanner with limited equipment when the patient has vomited and
aspirated. If a patient with UAO needs to lie flat (and still) for imaging they may require intubation in
any event.
Aspiration of gastric contents
Aspiration pneumonitis is a chemical process resulting from lung injury by gastric acid. In the selfventilating patient, this requires supportive therapy with supplemental oxygen and possibly continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP). If true aspiration pneumonia develops because of superinfection, antibiotic therapy
should be instituted in line with local guidance. Evidence is lacking to support the use of empirical antibiotic
therapy in all patients with evidence of aspiration. Aspiration is the commonest cause of death associated with
airway management during anaesthesia.
Negative pressure pulmonary oedema
Occasionally the negative pressures generated by vigorous ventilatory effort in the face of UAO can cause
pulmonary oedema. Confusingly, this may develop some hours after relief of the obstruction, and misdiagnosis as acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema or aspiration is possible. Treatment is with supplemental oxygen and CPAP. Depending on volume status, loop diuretics may be helpful.
The patient with a tracheostomy
Following the national tracheostomy safety project, adult inpatients with a tracheostomy should all have clear
guidance at the bedside indicating steps to be taken in the event of an emergency – follow these if called
to an acutely unwell inpatient.
For patients presenting with signs of airway compromise and a tracheostomy, the priorities are to
summon expert help and deliver oxygen by whatever means possible until assistance arrives.
General steps are as follows:
1	 Give high-flow oxygen via the stoma and face.
2	 Remove the inner tracheostomy tube and try to pass a suction catheter – if it passes easily, suction
and leave the outer tube in place. If respiratory effort is poor or lost, ventilate via the tracheostomy (the inner
tube may need to be replaced to attach a circuit).
3	 If a suction catheter cannot be passed, deflate the tracheostomy cuff and see if this relieves the
obstruction. If so, leave the cuff down and continue to provide oxygen.
4	 If obstruction persists, remove the tracheostomy altogether. Occlude the stoma and attempt ventilation from above using BMV with adjuncts or a supraglottic airway. If this fails try ventilation via the stoma
using a bag and paediatric mask.
Patients with laryngectomies cannot be ventilated or intubated from above since they do not have
an airway above the stoma. For this reason, supplemental oxygen applied to the face will not be helpful. The
default position in the emergency setting where the exact anatomy may not be clear is to apply oxygen to
the stoma and the face.
Can’t intubate can’t oxygenate
The situation where endotracheal intubation fails and oxygenation cannot be maintained despite ventilation
with bag and mask and appropriate adjuncts is well recognised in anaesthetic practice and clear algorithms
exist to manage such situations.
Emergency front-of-neck access (FONA) by means of scalpel cricothyroidotomy is the approach of choice
to re-establish airflow if other interventions fail. A horizontal incision is made through the cricothyroid
membrane and a small ETT inserted over a bougie allowing manual ventilation with 100% oxygen. A formal
surgical tracheostomy under local anaesthesia is also an option if available without delay.

<!-- page:777 -->
758
Acute Medicine
Further reading
Al-Qadi MO, Artenstein AW, Braman SS. (2013) The “forgotten zone“: acquired disorders of the trachea in
adults. Respir Med 107(9), 1301–1313. DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.03.017.
Eskander A, de Almeida JR, Irish JC. (2019) Acute upper airway obstruction. N Engl J Med 381(20),
1940–1949. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra1811697.
Freund Y, Viglino D, Cachanado M, et al. (2023) Effect of noninvasive airway management of comatose
patients with acute poisoning: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 330(23), 2267–2274.
Higgs A, BA MG, Goddard C, et al.; Difficult Airway Society; Intensive Care Society; Faculty of Intensive Care
Medicine; Royal College of Anaesthetists. (2018) Guidelines for the management of tracheal intubation in
critically ill adults. Br J Anaesth 120(2), 323–352. DOI: 10.1016/j.bja.2017.10.021.
Lighthall G, Harrison TK, Chu LF. (2013) Videos in clinical medicine: laryngeal mask airway in medical
emergencies. N Engl J Med 369(20), e26. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMvcm0909669.
Ortega R, Mehio AK, Woo A, Hafez DH. (2007) Videos in clinical medicine. Positive-pressure ventilation with
a face mask and a bag-valve device. N Engl J Med 357(4), e4. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMvcm071298.
Patel A, Pearce A. (2011) Progress in management of the obstructed airway. Anaesthesia 66(Suppl 2),
93–100. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2044.2011.06938.x.
Penketh J, Nolan JP. (2023) Airway management during cardiac arrest. Curr Opin Crit Care 29(3),
175–180. DOI: 10.1097/MCC.0000000000001033.
