# CHAPTER 108 Central vein cannulation

- Pages: 788-793
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:788 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
769
Indications, contra-indications and potential complications are given in Table 108.1.
Ultrasound should be used when available.
Equipment needed is given in Table 108.2. You will need at least one assistant to monitor the patient during
the procedure and assist with the equipment.
Choosing the approach
The internal jugular, femoral and subclavian veins are the veins most commonly used for central access.
•	 Cannulation of the internal jugular vein is generally associated with fewer complications than with the
subclavian vein and is the recommended approach in patients with a bleeding tendency or respiratory
failure (greater risk of pneumothorax with subclavian access). The right internal jugular vein is preferable
(contralateral to both the thoracic duct and the circulation of the dominant cerebral hemisphere in the
right-handed).
•	 Femoral venous cannulation may be preferred if rapidity of access is paramount (e.g. temporary transvenous
pacing lead in a haemodynamically unstable patient), or if central venous access is required during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Its drawbacks are a higher rate of infection, venous thrombosis and restricted
mobility of the leg.
Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the internal jugular vein
Preparation
1	 Confirm the indications for the procedure. Obtain informed consent.
2	 Prepare the surroundings and your equipment.
3	 Prepare the patient: connect electrocardiogram and oxygen saturation monitors; give oxygen via a mask
(which will lift the drape off the face). Lie the patient supine with head-down tilt (Trendelenburg position)
unless not tolerated. The head-down tilt is important to reduce the risk of air embolism, particularly for jugular venous access (as opposed to femoral access).
4	 Visualize the internal jugular vein with ultrasound. The vein can be distinguished from the artery by compressibility and phasic change with respiration of the former (Figures 108.1 and 108.2). If the internal jugular
vein is relatively flat (i.e. central venous pressure is low), head-down tilt or peripheral IV administration (if not
contraindicated) may increase its calibre.
5	 Open the procedure pack onto the trolley by the bedside. Use an aseptic, non-touch technique.
Central vein cannulation
Clement Lau and Sandeep S. Hothi
CHAPTER 108

<!-- page:789 -->
770
Acute Medicine
6	 Prepare the sterile sheath over the ultrasound probe.
7	 Reconfirm the location of the internal jugular vein with the sheathed probe.
8	 Anaesthetize the skin with 2 mL of lidocaine 1% using a 25 G (orange) needle. Then infiltrate a further
2–3 mL of lidocaine along the planned needle path.
9	 While the local anaesthetic is taking effect, prepare the venous catheter. Flush all lumens with normal saline.
Leave the central lumen open for passage of the guidewire but cap the other ports. Flush the dilator with
normal saline. Ensure the guidewire flows freely from its coil.
Table 108.2  Central vein cannulation: equipment.
Ultrasound machine
Sterile sheath for ultrasound probe and sterile ultrasound gel
Central venous catheter set containing the appropriate catheter length, number of lumens and lumen diameters
Table 108.1  Central vein cannulation: indications, contra-indications and potential complications.
Indications
Measurement of central venous pressure (CVP):
•	 Transfusion of large volumes of fluid required (the fluid itself can be given faster via a large-bore peripheral IV
cannula)
•	 Fluid challenge in patients with oliguria or hypotension
•	 To exclude hypovolaemia when clinical evidence is equivocal
Monitoring venous oxyhaemoglobin saturation
Cardiac output monitoring with a pulmonary artery catheter
Insertion of a temporary pacing lead (see Chapter 107) or pulmonary artery catheter
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filter placement
Administration of some drugs (e.g. epinephrine, norepinephrine and dopamine) and IV feeding solutions, which must
be given via a central vein
Renal replacement therapy and plasmapheresis
No suitable peripheral veins for IV infusion
Pacemaker/cardiac device placement
Contra-indications
Bleeding disorder (including platelet count <50 × 109/L, international normalised ratio (INR) >1.5, receiving oral
anticoagulant or anticoagulant-dose heparin, during or after thrombolytic therapy): discuss management with a
haematologist. If central venous access is needed urgently, before the bleeding disorder can be corrected, use the
femoral vein in preference to the internal jugular vein.
Prohibitive anatomic distortion
Local infection
Potential complications
During placement
Arterial puncture or laceration, which in the case of the carotid artery may lead to haematoma formation in the neck,
with compromise of the airway. Seek vascular surgical advice.
Pneumothorax (via internal jugular or subclavian vein) or tension pneumothorax
Haemothorax
Cardiac tamponade (can be caused by central venous catheter introduced by any route, if its tip lies below the
pericardial reflection and it perforates the vessel wall; least likely via internal jugular vein).
Injury to adjacent nerves
Air embolism
After placement
Infection
Venous thrombosis

<!-- page:790 -->
Central vein cannulation
771
Venepuncture
10	 Mount the needle for the central vein puncture on a 10 mL syringe containing 5 mL of normal saline and
flush it.
11	With the syringe and needle in your right hand, puncture the skin upstream of the probe and then
stop. Angle the probe in your left hand towards the needle and identify the needle artefact. Slowly
advance the needle with continuous gentle aspiration. Venepuncture is indicated by aspiration of venous
blood or visualized puncture of the vein. Stop advancing the needle and re-aspirate to confirm you are
in the vein.
12	 Hold the needle steady in position. Remove the syringe while supporting the needle. Blood should drip
from the needle. If it does not, then cover the hub of the needle with your thumb and use a clean syringe
to aspirate venous blood. If blood cannot be aspirated, leave the needle in place and rescan the vein. Do
not alter the angle of the needle while within the skin/soft tissue – doing so can result in laceration injuries.
If you are not sure if the needle is in the vein or the artery, either aspirate blood and check oxygen saturation, or connect to a pressure transducer.
Placing the catheter
13	 Having confirmed you are in the vein, pick up the guidewire and gently advance it (J end leading) into the
needle and vein. Pass the guidewire to just beyond the 20 cm marking. Withdraw the needle over the
guidewire and cover the puncture site with a piece of gauze.
14	 Use the blade to make a short incision along the guidewire at the site of skin puncture.
15	 Mount the dilator on the guidewire and advance it with gentle rotation and forward pressure to insert it to
a depth of 3–4 cm. There is no need to insert its whole length: doing so risks perforation of the vein.
Insert needle at 45° to skin,
aiming for the right nipple
in men or the right anterior
superior iliac spine in women
Clavicular head of
sternomastoid
Sternal head of
sternomastoid
Internal jugular
vein
Carotid artery
Figure 108.1  Relations of the right internal jugular vein. Ultrasound-guided puncture of the internal jugular vein is
the recommended method. Landmark-guided puncture, as depicted, may be chosen in an emergency by an
experienced operator.

<!-- page:791 -->
772
Acute Medicine
(a)
(b)
Medial
Lateral
Sternomastoid
Internal jugular vein
Carotid artery
Figure 108.2  Ultrasonography of the right internal jugular vein. Ultrasonography of the right internal jugular vein,
before (a) and after (b) compression by the ultrasound probe. The vein can be distinguished from the artery by its
compressibility. The depth from the skin to the anterior wall of the vein averages 11 mm (range 6–18 mm). The vein
is usually 10 mm in diameter, but its calibre is reduced in volume-depletion. Head-down tilt or volume loading
increases the diameter of the vein and facilitates venepuncture.

<!-- page:792 -->
Central vein cannulation
773
16	 Remove the dilator keeping the guidewire in place and cover the puncture site with gauze. Mount the
catheter onto the guidewire and advance it with gentle rotation and forward pressure to an insertion depth
of around 12 cm. Aspirate the central lumen to confirm venous blood then flush with normal saline. Close
the port with a sterile bung.
17	 Apply suture wings to the catheter as it exits the skin and suture in place.
18	 Remove the sterile drape from around the catheter, clean the skin and apply a bio-occlusive dressing.
Final points
19	 Clear up and dispose of sharps safely. Arrange a chest X-ray to confirm the position of the catheter. The tip
of the catheter should be at or above the carina.
20	 Document the procedure and post-procedure chest X-ray findings. If the catheter needs to be used immediately, use pressure monitoring to confirm the location is venous before starting any infusion.
Troubleshooting
Frequent ventricular extrasystoles or ventricular tachycardia during procedure may indicate that the
tip of the guidewire has passed across the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle: draw it back.
B
A
C
B
(a)
(b)
(c)
Inguinal
ligament
Pubic tubercle
Femoral canal
Adductor longus muscle
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Femoral nerve
Sartorius
muscle
Figure 108.3  Right femoral vein puncture. Panel (a) depicts the anatomy of the femoral vein; and panels (b) and (c),
the technique of femoral vein puncture. See text for details. Source: Rosen M, et al. (1993) Handbook of Percutaneous
Central Venous Catheterization, 2nd edn. London: WB Saunders. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

<!-- page:793 -->
774
Acute Medicine
Landmark-guided technique for cannulation
of the femoral vein
1	 Lie the patient flat. The leg should be slightly abducted and externally rotated. Identify the femoral artery
below the inguinal ligament: the femoral vein usually lies medially (Figure 108.3). Prepare the skin and
drape.
2	 Infiltrate the skin and subcutaneous tissues with 5–10 mL of lidocaine 1%. Place two fingers of your left
hand on the femoral artery to define its position. Holding the syringe in your right hand, place the tip of the
needle at the entry site on the skin. Move the syringe slightly laterally and advance the needle at an angle
of around 30° to the skin whilst aspirating for blood.
The above method can be easily performed with ultrasound guidance and this is recommended wherever
possible.
Catheter infection
If the catheter is infected the catheter must be removed and the tip sent for culture. Take blood cultures (one
via the catheter and one from the peripheral vein) and start antibiotic therapy. Seek a microbiologist’s advice.
Further reading
Ortega R, Song M, Hansen CJ, Barash P. (2010) Videos in clinical medicine. Ultrasound-guided internal
jugular vein cannulation. N Engl J Med 362, e57. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMvcm0810156.
Smith RN, Nolan JP. (2013) Central venous catheters. BMJ 347, f6570. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.f6570.
