# CHAPTER 113 Non-invasive ventilation

- Pages: 812-816
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:812 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
793
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV) refers to systems that support gas delivery between the atmosphere and the
lungs without the need for invasive ventilation via either endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy.
The two main uses of NIV in acute medicine are:
•	 Management of acute type 2 respiratory failure (T2RF) complicating an exacerbation of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (Chapter 23), when it can reduce the need for invasive ventilation and improve
survival.
•	 Management of patients with chronic T2RF maintained on home NIV presenting with worsening respiratory
failure.
Less commonly, acute decompensated T2RF is the first presentation of chronic diseases causing T2RF
(kyphoscoliosis, spinal injuries, neuromuscular diseases, e.g. motor neuron disease, or morbid obesity) and may
require similar management with NIV.
Contraindications to the use of NIV are summarized in Table 113.1. When a relative contraindication is present, NIV may be considered on the ward, if invasive ventilation and intensive care unit (ICU) care is
inappropriate.
NIV is often ineffective in treating severe hypoxaemia, as oxygen delivery may not be controlled. American
Thoracic Society guidelines suggest using NIV on a trial basis, before invasive ventilation. Liaise with intensive
care colleagues.
Non-invasive ventilation in acute hypercapnic
respiratory failure
NIV should be considered for respiratory acidosis which persists despite maximal medical therapy given within
60 min of admission (pH 7.25–7.35, PaCO2 >6 kPa (>45 mmHg)), where controlled oxygen is administered to
target peripheral saturations 88–92% using a Venturi system. The patient should be conscious and cooperative, and the treatment should be in keeping with the patient’s wishes. The underlying respiratory condition
and precipitant should be treated and optimised:
•	 In COPD, administration of bronchodilators (nebulised salbutamol 2.5–5 mg, ipratropium 500 mcg), steroids
if indicated (prednisolone 0.5-mg/kg or IV hydrocortisone 100 mg if no oral route), and antibiotics if
indicated.
•	 In other conditions, treat the underlying cause, for example giving naloxone for opiate toxicity, antibiotics if
suspected bacterial infection, or drainage of pneumothorax.
Non-invasive ventilation
Ivan Tang and Christopher Turnbull
CHAPTER 113

<!-- page:813 -->
794
Acute Medicine
•	 If immediate mechanical ventilation is not indicated, a plan of management and escalation should be
decided with consultant involvement and documented before starting NIV. Scenarios could include:
•	 Suitable for NIV and suitable for escalation to intensive care treatment/intubation and ventilation, if
required. Inform the local critical care outreach team, if available.
•	 Suitable for NIV but not suitable for escalation to intensive care treatment/intubation and ventilation
•	 Not suitable for NIV but for full active medical management
•	 Palliative care agreed as the most appropriate management
Set-up of non-invasive ventilation
NIV should be prescribed by a doctor trained in the use of NIV, and delivered in a setting where it can be managed by experienced staff (e.g. nurses and/or NIV physiotherapists working in resus, ICUs, high-dependency
units (HDUs), acute medical units or respiratory support units).
NIV typically refers to bi-level ventilation delivering two set pressures:
•	 The expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP) that recruits under-ventilated areas of the lungs, splints the
upper airway open, and reduces work of inspiration.
•	 The inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) that delivers a driving pressure above EPAP, which is proportional to tidal volume.
The set-up of bilevel NIV is summarized in Table 113.2.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is another form of NIV that provides one fixed pressure and is
used mainly to improve oxygenation in type 1 respiratory failure due to cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
(Chapter 14) and COVID-19 pneumonitis.
Up to 30% of patients are unable to tolerate NIV; the set-up is crucial to its success. Time spent with the
patient in the first 30 min helps to reassure the patient and prevents future problems.
Management of the patient receiving non-invasive
ventilation
Patients receiving NIV outside HDU/ICU should have continuous electrocardiogram and pulse oximetry monitoring for the first 12 h, and physiological observations recorded every 15 minutes for the first 2 h.
•	 Repeat arterial (or arterialised capillary) blood gas sampling should be done an hour after achieving the
target settings. Further sampling should be performed at 4 h, sooner if significant changes are made to the
Table 113.1  Contraindications to NIV.
Absolute contraindications to NIV
Relative contraindications to NIV
Impending respiratory arrest*
Confusion or agitation
Upper airway obstruction*
Diagnosis of pneumonia
Glasgow Coma Scale score <8*
Severe hypoxaemia
Respiratory rate <8 breaths/min*
Haemodynamic instability
Acute asthma*
Copious respiratory secretions
Guillain-Barré syndrome with bulbar palsy*
Vomiting
Undrained pneumothorax
Bowel obstruction
Facial burns or trauma
Upper airway or upper GI surgery
Arterial pH < 7.25
* In all these settings invasive ventilation should be considered.

<!-- page:814 -->
Non-invasive ventilation
795
settings. If improvement is inadequate, or if there is deterioration, it may be necessary to escalate to intensive care for consideration of invasive ventilation.
•	 Problem solving is summarized in Table 113.3.
Weaning of non-invasive ventilation
•	 In general, patients require acute NIV for 48–72 h after presentation.
•	 Day 1 continual NIV with breaks for meals, drinks, administration of medications by mouth or nebulizer,
reducing the NIV time by 4–6 h/day (though continuing with overnight therapy).
•	 Some patients will self-wean earlier, and others may need longer. Weaning should be guided by clinical
impression and blood gases.
•	 Patients who cannot be fully liberated from NIV or those who remain hypercapnic should be referred to a
specialist for consideration of home NIV.
Problems
Table 113.2  Checklist for set-up of NIV (bi-level NIV).
Explain the treatment to the patient.
Use a well-fitting full-face mask (sized to the patient: small, medium or large).
Start at low pressures tolerated by most patients: IPAP of 10 cmH2O, EPAP of 5 cmH2O
Other settings at default levels.
Allow the patient to hold the mask over their face without the straps tightened.
Tighten the straps to form a seal around the face, but not so tight as to squash the membranes of the mask.
Increase the IPAP by increments of 2 cmH2O, as tolerated by the patient, to target a tidal volume of 6–8 mL/kg (ideal
body weight). It should not take long to reach the target pressure.
In general, lower EPAPs (5 cmH2O) are adequate for patients with COPD due to intrinsic resistance to expiration, whereas
with obesity hypoventilation and obstructive sleep apnoea higher EPAPs (8–10 cmH2O) may be required for recruitment
and splinting. Changes in EPAP should trigger a change in IPAP to maintain the driving pressure (IPAP-EPAP).
Entrain oxygen to the circuit (or in newer ventilators, change FiO2) to a prescribed target (e.g. 88–92%).
Ensure correct equipment available, e.g. Venturi systems for breaks, T-pieces for nebulisers via NIV.
Table 113.3  Problem-solving in NIV.
If the patient receiving NIV is not improving, consider:
Ventilator issues
•	 Check the ventilator is connected to mains, switched on and connected
•	 Check for alarms
Circuit and mask issues
•	 Check that pressure is being delivered at the mask end; are respiratory secretions blocking any ports? If using a
non-vented system is there an expiratory port correctly sited in the circuit?
•	 Check for kinks in tubing, e.g. in bedrails
•	 Check for mask leaks and adjust by loosening and reseating. Over-tightening can lead to skin ulceration. Nasogastric tubes, if needed, should be fine-bore to reduce mask leak
Suboptimal medical management
•	 Consider chest physiotherapy, nebuliser administration via NIV circuit
•	 Incorrect oxygen target
Complications arising from NIV
•	 Check for the development of pneumothorax or aspiration
Persistent hypercapnia, when none of the above applies, is likely to be due to inadequate ventilation. If continuing with
ward-based NIV, in general the next step would be to increase the IPAP by an increment of 2–5 cmH2O (most machines
deliver a maximal IPAP of ∼30 cm H2O).

<!-- page:815 -->
796
Acute Medicine
Breathing asynchrony
Breathing asynchrony, one of the commonest reasons for patients failing on NIV, is when the ventilator delivers
breaths outside of the patient’s intrinsic breathing rate, ergo causing discoordination. From the end of the bed,
look for chest wall movements and timing of breathing with NIV. If asynchrony is detected, seek expert help.
Changes can be made to trigger sensitivity, inspiratory and expiratory times and back-up breathing rate as
appropriate.
Nasal bridge ulceration
Ulceration of the skin of the nasal bridge from a tightly or poorly fitting mask is a common problem. Regular
checks of skin integrity should be performed, as well as checking for mask leak, as air leaks can cause corneal
injury. If there is incipient ulceration, consider changing to a different mask interface such as a low-profile fullface mask, using gel pads, and seeking advice from a tissue viability team.
Admissions in patients on long-term home NIV
Increasing numbers of patients are being cared for in the community with home NIV. There may be features of
inadequate treatment, such as daytime sleepiness (indicative of sleep fragmentation), morning headaches suggestive of persisting hypercapnia or snoring while on NIV. There should be a low threshold to check arterial or
capillary blood gases and seek specialist advice. Home ventilation teams can often interrogate the ventilator
for usage data.
When admitted with unrelated problems, patients have occasionally had their NIV omitted in error. Ongoing
NIV is crucial to prevent decompensation and should be continued unless a contraindication has developed.
Use the patient’s own NIV where possible. Inform the respiratory team/team responsible for their NIV therapy. In those who have presented with worsening/decompensated T2RF, both the respiratory and intensive
care teams should be involved as appropriate. The reasons for deterioration include:
•	 Presenting condition worsens respiratory function, for example pneumonia.
•	 Decreased use of NIV prior to admission, for example because of vomiting.
•	 NIV not tolerated.
•	 NIV interface no longer adequate due to patient factors, i.e. excessive facial hair, or equipment
degradation.
•	 Settings no longer adequate, for example following weight gain.
•	 Worsening of underlying condition.
Identify and treat the underlying cause if possible and consider either increasing the NIV pressure settings if
inadequate tidal volumes (target usually 6–8 mL/kg ideal body weight) or increasing the hours of NIV usage.
Many patients on NIV have a poor prognosis because of the underlying diagnosis
•	 Check if they have advanced care plans.
•	 Check current or previously expressed wishes about future treatments, such as 24 h-a-day NIV use, invasive
ventilation, and resuscitation.
•	 Consider palliative care involvement.
•	 NIV can be weaned in end-of-life care if wished by the patient. An individualised approach is suggested, and
it may be useful to seek advice from experienced respiratory and palliative care colleagues.

<!-- page:816 -->
Non-invasive ventilation
797
Further reading
Davidson AC, Banham S, Elliott M, et al. (2016) British thoracic society/intensive care society acute
hypercapnic respiratory failure guideline development group. 2016 BTS/ICS Guidelines for the ventilatory
management of acute hypercapnic respiratory failure in adults. Thorax 71, ii1–ii35. https://www.
britthoracic.org.uk/document-library/clinical-information/acute-hypercapnic-respiratory-failure/bts-
guidelinesfor-ventilatory-management-of-ahrf/.
Ergan B, Oczkowski S, Rochwerg B, et al. (2019) European respiratory society guidelines on long-term home
non-invasive ventilation for management of COPD. Eur Respir J 54(3), 1901003. DOI: 10.1183/13993003.
01003-2019.
Kelly CR, Higgins AR, Chandra SN. (2015) Videos in clinical medicine. non-invasive positive-pressure
ventilation. N Engl J Med 372, e30. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMvcm1313336.
Murphy PB, Rehal S, Arbane G, et al. (2017) Effect of home noninvasive ventilation with oxygen therapy vs
oxygen therapy alone on hospital readmission or death after an acute COPD exacerbation: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 317(21), 2177–2186. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.4451.
Rochwerg B, Brochard L, Elliott MW, et al. (2017) Official ERS/ATS clinical practice guidelines: noninvasive
ventilation for acute respiratory failure. Eur Respir J 50(2), 1602426. DOI: 10.1183/13993003.
02426-2016.
