# CHAPTER 114 Arterial line insertion

- Pages: 817-820
- PDF: Acute Medicine A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies (Mridula Rajwani (Editor) etc.) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
<!-- page:817 -->
Acute Medicine: A Practical Guide to the Management of Medical Emergencies, Sixth Edition.
Edited by Mridula Rajwani, Leila Vaziri, and Ivie Gbinigie.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2026 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
798
Introduction
An ‘arterial line’ is an intravascular catheter placed into a peripheral artery. This is a common procedure in the
emergency department and critical care units and is also used for monitoring acutely unwell patients prehospitally. Some wards providing increased care (e.g. medical high-dependency units) may support arterial line
usage; most low-dependency medical wards in the United Kingdom are not able to care for patients requiring
arterial line insertion and monitoring.
Indications
1	 Haemodynamic monitoring
Transduction of the arterial pressure waveform allows real-time monitoring of blood pressure (BP) in critically
unwell patients. It can also be used to secure reliable BP readings in patients at extremes of body size and
with arrhythmias (e.g. atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular rate) which can make non-invasive blood pressure
monitoring less accurate.
Beat-to-beat BP monitoring is used to titrate and monitor the resuscitation of shocked patients. In critical
care, computer analysis of the waveform is used to estimate cardiac stroke volume and stroke volume
variation as a marker of volume status.
2	 Blood sampling
Aspiration of arterial blood from the line can be performed, which can be used for arterial blood gas
analysis as well as standard lab tests. This has the advantage of minimising painful peripheral blood
samples, particularly in patients needing several tests done in a short time (e.g. ventilatory support or
during the acute phases of Diabetic Keto Acidosis [DKA]). Arterial line aspiration can be an alternative
in patients with poor peripheral IV access. Care should be taken to ensure that any saline present in the
tubing between the patient and the aspiration port is removed and disposed of before the blood is
aspirated with a fresh syringe.
Arterial lines are NOT used for the administration of drugs, and the accidental administration of
vasoactive or vaso irritant substances via the intra-arterial route can result in severe distal ischaemia
and limb loss.
Arterial line insertion
Tom Cibulskas
CHAPTER 114

<!-- page:818 -->
Arterial line insertion
799
Contraindications
1	 High risk of limb ischaemia: for example, known severe arterial disease in the artery intended for
cannulation. Allen’s test can be used to assess collateral perfusion of the hand in radial artery cannulation
(see below).
2	 Infection (e.g. cellulitis) in the peri-arterial soft tissues.
3	 Known or suspected aneurysm/pseudoaneurysm at the site of intended cannulation.
4	 Future planned procedure at the same site (e.g. radial artery cannulation for percutaneous coronary
intervention).
5	 Coagulopathy: a relative contraindication; the risk of bleeding and time needed to correct coagulopathy
should be weighed against the urgency of line insertion.
Complications
•	 Vasospasm: rarely causes long-term complications, but reduces the chance of subsequent successful attempts
at the same site.
•	 Bruising/bleeding.
•	 Infection.
•	 Injection of intra-arterial air (air embolism) or vasoactive drugs leading to distal ischaemia.
•	 Damage to local structures – typically nerves running adjacent to arteries causing neuropraxia. Long-term
nerve injury is rare.
•	 Formation of aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm or arteriovenous fistula.
•	 Loss of guidewire into circulation when using Seldinger technique – often requiring surgical or radiological
retrieval.
Equipment
•	 Arterial catheter: usually 20G or 22G. Both Seldinger (guidewire) and cannula-type (plastic catheter over a
rigid needle) catheters are commonly used.
•	 Sterile procedure pack including a drape, skin prep, needles and syringes for local anaesthetic
administration.
•	 Sterile dressing: specific arterial line dressings are commonly available; however a standard intravenous
cannula dressing can be used if unavailable.
•	 Sterile gloves.
•	 Arterial line transducer set: usually a specific tubing system attached to a 500 mL bag of 0.9% saline, which
is flushed before connection to the patient to avoid air embolism and give the most relative pressure trace.
Most commercially available sets have a built-in transducer wiring to allow connection to compatible
bedside monitoring systems.
•	 Pressure bag: pressurises the saline to 300 mmHg, allowing the transducer to function. Most transducer sets
will also incorporate a flushing device to allow catheter patency to be checked and to ensure no blood is left
to clot inside the tubing after aspiration.
•	 Local anaesthetic: usually 2 mL 1% or 2% lidocaine.
Most arterial line insertion is performed using an aseptic non-touch technique (ANTT). In certain
settings (e.g. theatre and critical care) demanding full asepsis a sterile gown, mask and surgical hat can
also be worn.

<!-- page:819 -->
800
Acute Medicine
Technique
•	 Wash hands; don sterile gloves. Apply skin prep whilst ensuring ANTT. Apply drape to skin once fully dry.
•	 Palpate the target artery (most commonly radial) and inject 1–2 mL of local anaesthetic subcutaneously.
Be sure to aspirate first to avoid intra-arterial local anaesthetic injection.
•	 Insert the tip of the chosen device through the anaesthetised skin and into the artery. An ultrasound probe
can be used if needed (see below). A shallow angle of approximately 30° to the skin is ideal.
If using a Seldinger-type set
•	 Vascular cannulation is confirmed by a strong flashback of bright red arterial blood through the introducer
needle. The arterial pulsation should be obvious and blood will flow freely until the needle is occluded
(most  sets include a bung which can be used to temporarily occlude the proximal end of the needle).
Poor flow of darker blood indicates likely venous cannulation; if this occurs the needle should be removed
and flushed before further attempts.
•	 Advance the guidewire through the introducer needle into the artery. It should pass freely; significant resistance indicates that the tip of the needle is lying in the subcutaneous tissue and should be withdrawn or
relocated. Care must be taken to NOT advance the wire too far and a grip should always be maintained on
the wire to minimise the risk of this.
•	 Remove the introducer needle over the guidewire, taking care to not dislodge or advance the wire in the
process.
•	 Advance the catheter over the guidewire; it should pass into the vessel without significant resistance.
•	 Remove the guidewire; flashback of bright red arterial blood confirms the correct location.
If using a cannula-type set
•	 Advance the cannula tip into the artery; flashback or bright red blood into the chamber (similar to the
flashback when using a venflon-type intravenous cannula) confirms arterial positioning.
•	 Advance the plastic cannula into the vessel whilst keeping the needle still. It is easy to withdraw the needle
rather than advance the cannula at this stage, which can result in the cannula inadvertently being advanced
into the subcutaneous tissues. The risk of this can be reduced by advancing the needle a further 2–3 mm
after flashback is first achieved. The cannula should advance without significant resistance.
•	 Once the cannula is fully advanced, remove the needle. Aspiration of arterial blood from the proximal end
of the cannula confirms intra-arterial positioning.
Final steps
•	 Connect the appropriate, flushed transducer tubing to the cannula.
•	 Use a sterile swab to remove any blood from the surrounding skin.
•	 Some cannulas have small holes to allow suturing to the underlying skin, which is common practice to
increase the lifespan of arterial lines in critical care.
•	 A sterile dressing should be applied, ideally with a transparent section to allow direct observation of the
insertion site for bleeding, kinks or signs of infection.
Allen’s test
Allen’s test is used to assess patency of the collateral circulation (ulnar artery) to the hand prior to radial artery
cannulation. It is good practice to perform it before starting, although the risk of hand ischaemia secondary to
arterial line insertion is very low. It may be appropriate to omit Allen’s test in emergency situations involving the
resuscitation of a shocked patient.

<!-- page:820 -->
Arterial line insertion
801
•	 Occlude both the radial and ulnar arteries of the same wrist with firm pressure.
•	 The patient should open and close their fist several times. If the arterial supplies are properly occluded, the
palm with appear pale.
•	 The ulnar pressure is released, whilst radial pressure is maintained. In a normal result, the collateral ulnar
circulation perfuses the palm and it becomes pink.
Use of ultrasound
Ultrasound can be used to help locate the peripheral arteries, which can be helpful in patients in shock or with
significantly raised BMI. With an appropriate probe cover, real-time ultrasound-guided cannulation of arterial
vessels can be accomplished. As with intravenous access, both in-plane and out-of-plane views can be used to
aid in choice and localisation of a target vessel (US images below).
